With the “winds of change” rapidly blowing down Africa and independence assured for her northern neighbours, Rhodesia’s destiny now seemed very uncertain.  
Rhodesia had been “occupied” in 1890 by the Pioneer Column in the name of Queen Victoria. and the capital, Salisbury, named after the British Prime Minister of the day. The man behind it all had been Cape Colony politician, financier and mining magnate Cecil John Rhodes, who had sought to extend British influence - not to mention his own - in Africa.  
In 1888, the territory’s Matabele king, Lobengula had signed a concession giving Rhodes the sole right to the mineral exploitation of Mashonaland. Legend had it that the territory north of the Limpopo River was the location of King Solomon’s famous mines, and that promise of glittering wealth was ultimately to be fulfilled.  
Rhodes then got Queen Victoria’s blessing together with a Royal Charter to administer Mashonaland in her name, and the British South Africa Company was formed to administer the territory.  
As Rhodesian author John Lovan says in his book, _Contact_, both African and Briton were less than honest with each other. The wording of the concession document seemed to camouflage Rhodes’s intention of colonizing Lobengula’s Mashonaland fiefdom ... while Lobengula no doubt hoped that by signing the concession, he would keep other hunters at bay.  
Two years later, 500 mounted infantry - the British South Africa Company’s police - and 180 Pioneers trekked northwards and arrived in what was to be called Cecil Square. The British flag was run up, there were three cheers for Her Imperial Majesty - and yet another new territory was added to Queen Victoria’s long list of far-flung colonies.  
The lean years that followed were difficult, precarious, fraught with disease and danger, the latter coming from the warrior tribe, the Matabeles, offshoots of Shaka’s dreaded Zulu race, who had realized too late what was happening and had then forbidden the settlers’ entry.  
But those tough adventurers survived, civilization gradually spread and the country began to prosper. Farms were cut out of the virgin bush and businesses grew and flourished.  
From the very beginning, there was a constant influx of new settlers. The early ones trekked northwards across the rugged bush terrain in creaking ox-drawn wagons. seeking adventure, gold and a new life in the young. uncharted country. It was the stuff of which great adventure tales were made.  
Rhodes fulfilled promises made to the Matabele chiefs and set land aside for them.  
The African chiefs were given greater powers and the authority of the British South Africa Company was reduced. The settlers were given four representatives in a Legislative Assembly and Rhodes promised them eventual self-government,  
When the early settlers made the long trek to Cecil Square in those difficult pioneering days, they had done so with a spirit of adventure., a search for a new life and the hope of finding mineral wealth. not with any burning desire to colonize new territory for Queen Victoria.  
Britain had taken no part in founding the country and had not rallied when times were hard As Rhodesians saw it, the fact that the charter giving them the right to administer the country bore the word “Royal” did not give the British the right to meddle in their affairs.  
In 1923, Rhodesia voted for Home Rule and became a self-governing colony. The British paid three and three-quarter million pounds to the British South Africa Company as compensation for 33 years’ administration (two million would have to be repaid to Britain by the Rhodesian Government) and the company was allowed to keep its commercial and mineral rights.  
Britain gave Rhodesians the right to legislate, maintain an Army and run the Civil Service ... all of which they had been doing anyway. And the British Government retained supervisory powers.  
Forty-one years later, in 1964, Ian Smith, farmer, World War II Royal Air Force hero, became Prime Minister. He was the first Rhodesian-born premier and he was determined to get independence from Britain and remove her reserve powers. The country was self-governing after all, which was more than could be said for her more backward ex-Federal partners.  
But Britain argued that it was not going to grant independence to Rhodesia as its franchise was more restrictive than any other British territory to which independence had been granted. Later, British Premier Sir Alec Douglas-Home told Smith that if he wanted independence under the 1961 Constitution - which widened the franchise to allow Africans in Parliament for the first time - he must show it was acceptable to the people as a whole.  
A referendum duly tested the white electorate, who voted ten to one in favor of independence and an _indaba_ - a meeting - of 622 African chiefs and headmen supported the move.  
But by then, Britain had a new Prime Minister. Harold Wilson and his Labour Party were determined to complete the decolonization process of Central Africa through majority rule in Rhodesia and refused to accept the meeting with the chiefs as a valid indication of African opinion
Britain was not going to grant independence until majority rule was guaranteed - and that meant African majority rule.  
Ian Smith. however, had stated that there would be no African nationalist government in his lifetime. Such a government would mean the end of the European and the civilization that he had brought to the country. People were getting tired of hearing that Africa was going to be preserved for people of every race and color with the exception of the European.. He seemed to be the only one who did not come into the picture.  
If far-away socialist Britain would not grant Rhodesia independence, then Rhodesia would just have to take it unilaterally.  
Around the world speculation was rife. Would Rhodesia dare to declare UDl. and would Britain send troops to Rhodesia to crush the rebellion? While the Tories had been opposed to an armed intervention against their Rhodesian “kith and kin”, no one knew for certain what the Socialists would do.  
Only the use of force would have delayed the rebels taking their independence. B~t then Harold Wilson declared there would be no invasion to settle Rhodesia’s constitutional problems, and that option was ruled out.  
The way was now clear ... and on Armistice Day, November 11,1965, the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month - a reminder to Rhodesia’s own kith and kin across the other side of the world of Rhodesia’s past and proud war record - Rhodesia defied Britain, convention and the world by declaring UDI the Unilateral Declaration of Independence. It was the first rebellion against the Crown since the American Revolution of 1776.  
Addressing Rhodesians and the world, Ian Smith explained: “There can be no happiness in this country while the absurd situation continues to exist where people such as ourselves, who have ruled themselves with an impeccable record for over forty years, are denied what is freely granted to other countries who have ruled themselves, in some cases, for no longer than a year.  
“The decision which we have taken today is a refusal by Rhodesians to sell their birthright, and even if we were to surrender, does anyone believe that Rhodesia would be the last target of the communists and the Afro-Asian bloc?”  
Harold Wilson, acting on intelligence from his MI6 men in Rhodesia - responsible for intelligence, espionage and counter-espionage operations overseas - said famously that the rebellion would be over in weeks not months. Britain’s solution to bringing the rebels to heel was to use economic measures, not military means. But Wilson had grossly overestimated the effect of trade sanctions against Rhodesia and underestimated the country’s ability to get help from neighboring South Africa, Portugal and elsewhere. in overcoming them. Smith too, had talked of the three-day wonder. He thought that by declaring UDI on a Friday, after the stock exchange had closed, all the excitement would have died down by Monday. Both men were wrong.  
Britain first imposed sanctions, then an oil embargo. Eighteen months later the UN ordered a total ban on trade with Rhodesia. Such measures were designed to bring Rhodesia to her knees, yet from 1969-1974 - before the world recession and the fall of white rule in Mozambique - Rhodesia’s economic growth was more impressive than Britain’s. While many luxuries were in short supply, Rhodesians soon learned to do without them.  
If they couldn’t get British goods, they could get Japanese, French and West German substitutes, which were better anyway.  
Nor had Harold Wilson and successive British Prime Ministers reckoned on Rhodesian ingenuity. What essentials they could not acquire by devious means, they made and grew themselves, becoming amazingly self-sufficient, an attribute that came in useful when the war got into top gear and Rhodesians were able to manufacture their own weapons to overcome procurement difficulties.  
Rhodesian businessmen became masters at overcoming UN sanctions and trade with her northern neighbors - as well as the West - flourished. Many African States ignored sanctions completely and most members of the OAU traded with Rhodesia. As President Bongo of Gabon once said: “If I do not give a list, it is out of courtesy.”  
The black States might well have condemned the white racists in the south, but behind the scenes it was all very different. It was Rhodesian beef and South African wine which graced the tables of African presidential palaces. The maize train spoke louder than a hundred speeches at the UN and it was Rhodesian maize which fed countless thousands of Africans in black Africa, including those determined to bring down the fall of white Rhodesia.  
Immediately after UDI. Wilson (_“I Hate Wilson”_ stickers sold like hot cakes) dispatched RAF Javelin jet fighters to Zambia (air traffic controllers in Salisbury kindly guided them in) but they were not to be used against white Rhodesians.  
Officially, they had been sent to defend Zambia’s airspace, but according to authoritative journalist Chapman Pincher, their purpose was simply to occupy the airfields to prevent the Russians from doing so. Such was the value of the “kith and kin” factor. that the RAF officers toasted Smith’s health during their New Year’s Eve celebrations in their Lusaka mess.  
As for the SAS, the unit became a “lost legion”, cut off by politics from its parent unit in Hereford. Personal friendships did, however, continue.  
UDI was a factor that would affect Rhodesia for the rest of her days. It set in motion a sequence of events that would gather momentum and change the map of Africa once more. British and American politicians would come and go in search for the all-elusive settlement, and it would be 14 long years before the rebellion was over and majority rule attained. And when it was, the incoming government would be far worse than anything the white Rhodesians or the British could have imagined. Tragically, 30 000 Rhodesians would die and thousands injured or maimed before an uneasy peace and recognition carne.  
Back in the defiant mid-60s, however, the drums of African nationalism had largely been silenced and the prospects of war seemed very remote. Joshua Nkomo, Ndabaningi Sithole, Robert Mugabe and hundreds of others had been cast in prison where they would remain for ten years.  
Nkomo’s party, ZAPV, and Sithole’s ZANU, had been banned and their young lieutenants had fled into exile. In the post-VDI era, the black nationalists, now totally committed to the forceful overthrow of white political domination, looked to Britain to act for them. But that was a mistake in their strategy. Britain would not take up arms for them: they would have to do the job themselves...
