A couple of months after the tragic deaths of the four men, a further clandestine operation was planned, once again in conjunction with CIO. The mission - codenamed _Sculpture_ - was to destroy terrorist documents and records held in the ZANU headquarters in Lusaka. They had to get into the building surreptitiously and place on various filing cabinets a number of incendiary devices, which were designed to raze the building to the ground.
The plan called for the infiltration of three SAS operators - Lieutenant Brian Robinson. Sergeant Jannie Bohman and Sergeant Dan Hartley - into Zambia by light aircraft. The aircraft, bearing false registration numbers, was to land on a deserted airstrip some distance from Lusaka under the cloak of darkness and without lights on. Having landed by moonlight, the three men were to meet a Zambian-based agent who would transport them to the target area.
Two weeks before the operation, rehearsals took place in the Bulawayo area. Landing a light aircraft at night without lights and with only the moon to guide them calls for considerable skill, and this part of the operation was rehearsed several times over the same distance the plane would fly on Operation _Sculpture_.
Someone spotted the plane one night but no one seemed to be able to account for it ... and in the next day’s paper there were reports that an unidentified flying object had been sighted near Brady Barracks. The SAS were not about to put the record straight.
The three operators encountered numerous operational problems which appear so easy in the adventure movies. Breaking a window silently proved a major difficulty as Brian Robinson remembers.
“We tried bricks wrapped up in newspaper covered in syrup, so the glass wouldn’t fall on the ground. We also tried a glass cutter. Neither of these methods was successful and we ended up using a pellet gun pistol, which allowed us to make a hole big enough to insert a wire, which in turn enabled us to open a window … a most unprofessional method of breaking and entering.”
They were to wear civilian clothing with all the _Made in Rhodesia_ labels removed and in the event of things turning nasty and they were stopped at a roadblock, they would have terrorist weapons to “talk” their way out.
Late one night behind the drawn curtains of one operator’s city home, the team worked on the ringmain; the device linking up the various charges that they planned to spread around the target and which would enable all the charges to go off together. They planned a thirty-minute time delay, to give them enough time to get out and away.
The intelligence for the op was sketchy. It had apparently been gleaned from the pages of a South African magazine which had carried a story on the ZANU headquarters. Not an ideal method of getting information, but in those early days of the war, it was the best they had.
Nevertheless, it was a very sophisticated operation and the risks to the three operators were great. They were to be far from home with no help at hand. They didn’t even have radio communications with the south.
Finally, all the rehearsals and trials were over and it was time for the real thing. At last light, the three men flew out of Rhodesia; their destination a private flying club 64 kilometres (40 miles) from Lusaka.
The pilot, Peter Kale, flew low under radar cover. Finding an airstrip without a flare path at night, with only a moon to assist is not easy, but the navigation was spot on and the trip uneventful.
The pilot carried out a glide approach to keep engine noise to a minimum and brought the Cessna 206 down, taxiing to a halt at the far end of the runway, well away from the clubhouse. As luck would have it a rowdy party was in progress that night and the arrival of the plane went unnoticed.
As the aircraft came to a halt, the three men prepared to deplane, eager to get clear of the Cessna as soon as possible. But the pilot had forgotten to raise the electric flaps, which prevented them opening the back door, and the tension inside the plane mounted.
After what appeared to be an eternity, the flaps were raised and they were able to pile out.
Then the Rhodesians were off, running to the safety of the bush fringing the airstrip. The pilot opened the throttle and took off into the night.
But from the start, things went wrong.
The three SAS men immediately set about locating the agent. But nobody had specified which end of the runway the rendezvous was to take place and Brian Robinson was furious with himself for neglecting such an important detail. The three men subsequently trudged up and down the edge of the 900 metre runway hugging the cover of the bush, trying to make a rendezvous.
When the meeting eventually took place it was something straight out of a Peter Sellers’ comedy about the bungling French mustachioed Inspector C1ousseau.
In keeping with the spy role demanded of him, the agent was wearing a full-length leather jacket and a hat pulled down well over his eyes. And Brian Robinson was so relieved to see him that he stuck out his hand and pumped the agent’s arm vigorously for about twenty seconds before giving the password.
Now it was time to go and destroy the terrorist headquarters. The SAS men picked up their Castle Lager cooler bags containing the incendiary bombs and piled into the agent’s car.
The agent clipped a new number plate on to the old one and they headed off into the night for the Zambian capital.
“Oh, by the way,” he said matter-of-factly, “the police have been mounting road blocks lately.” But apart from the odd policeman on night patrol which almost caused them an instant coronary, the journey to Lusaka was uneventful.
There were no road blocks into town, no one to stop their progress. Everything was going well. Soon the yellow street lights of Lusaka loomed before them. Then came the shock.
The agent decided to drive slowly past ZANU headquarters to give the team an on-the-spot run down of the target As they passed the target, they were amazed to see the streets full of youths in the middle of an interfaction riot. The lights of the headquarters were going on and off every two minutes and the area was teeming with people.
It was chaos - and incredibly bad luck for the SAS.
Undaunted by the unexpected turn of events, the agent dropped the team off and they made their way to a piece of open ground to the south of the target where they watched the proceedings with wide-eyed amazement
Leaving Jannie Bollman behind with the charges, the other two men eased forward to reconnoitre the building and from their place in the shadows, they watched the battle.
Lieutenant Robinson tried to get into the building from every possible angle, but it was just no use. The area was so well lit that a surreptitious entry was impossible.
They had been dropped off at 23h00 and the fighting raged for a full ninety minutes. The pick-up time was 02h00 and it was obvious that even if the battle did subside, there would not be time to complete the operation.
There was no option but to abort the op and rendezvous with the agent. The agent arrived spot on the appointed hour, then drove them to the perimeter fence of Lusaka’s main international airport. Quickly the three men scaled the fence. Then with their deadly packages still in tow, they made their way to the apron on the runway which was still in use.
Now they had to wait for their lift. But the pilot was late and as they waited in the darkness, their disappointment at having failed to pull the job off gave way to worry. What if something had gone wrong and the pilot didn’t come? What would they do?
How would they get home?
Thirty minutes after the appointed pick-up time, the sound of a plane flying low penetrated their thoughts. At last! The airfield was still very active, but the Rhodesian pilot simply joined the circuit and landed immediately after a Zambian Airways aircraft.
He came to a halt and the three anxious men out on the apron were so relieved that he had arrived at last, that they flashed their pencil torches at him - the pre-arranged signal - for what must have been a thousand times.
The door of the aircraft was flung open and the three operators leapt in dragging their unused incendiary devices behind them.
The pilot opened his throttle and they were airborne within 300 metres. Lusaka control tower hadn’t even bothered to call them up as they cleared the circuit and disappeared into the night.
They gave the pilot and navigator their sad news, then the sony team slept for the remainder of their journey as the plane headed for Kariba where the three men were debriefed by the SAS commander and a CIO man.
They were bitterly disappointed at the failure of the mission. But as Brian Robinson recalls, a number of very valuable lessons had been learned which would stand them in good stead for the clandestine missions yet to come.
They had discovered the absolute necessity for accurate intelligence, complete detail and the need for alternative plans if things went wrong.
Had the pick-up not been planned for the same night, they might have been able to remain in the area until the following day when things had quietened down. They had not specified which end of the runway to meet the agent and didn’t have a plan if the agent failed to meet them ... and there had been no recovery plan if he failed to meet them at the ZANU headquarters.
Operation _Sculpture_ was to be the first and last secret operation without High Frequency communications.
Another early operation involved the attempted sabotage of 12500 tons of Rhodesian-bought coal being stockpiled in Zambia, allegedly accumulated for the time Zambia closed the border. If the coal could be destroyed perhaps Zambia would continue buying Rhodesian coal ... ?
An SAS team planned to help the coal ignite with their specially-made firebricks, but the half dozen mountains of coal that awaited them, would have taken far more than a piecemeal attack. In the event, the coal was moved, the border was not closed and Zambia continued to trade with Rhodesia for several years.
These and other early undercover operations were to remain a closely-guarded secret. So delicate were they in fact, that the SAS men were told if they were captured or killed, the Rhodesian Government would disclaim any knowledge of them.
