There was a certain lieutenant in the 1st Battalion, Rhodesian African Rifles who had distinguished himself on Operation _Nickel_ in 1968 ... an operation mounted in the wake of the first major terrorist incursions into Rhodesia.
He had carried out a follow-up operation of some 85 kilometres (54 miles) in just 48 hours and such was his determination that he had to take a boot resupply.
He always led from the front and during a brief pause, he heard the click of a safety catch or a similar sound made by the withdrawal of a grenade pin, indicating that he was in the centre of a well-concealed enemy position, and the middle of an ambush.
Acting on reflexes, he immediately fired towards the sound, killing two terrorists and causing four others to surrender. On learning that other terrorists were concealed nearby, the lieutenant, with complete disregard for his own safety, immediately positioned himself where he could subject the area to fire, and in the ensuing battle, a further six enemy were killed and two appeared with their hands held high above their heads.
The lieutenant radioed for helicopter support, eased springs and returned to base camp, wondering what the fuss concerning terrorism was all about.
The success of the action was entirely due to his quick, fearless reactions and remarkable qualities of leadership, and he was later awarded the Bronze Cross of Rhodesia for his gallantry.
Having seen action with the RAR he decided to try his hand with the SAS and duly passed selection in 1969. There was a shortage of officer accommodation at the time and a number of men were given permission to live out of the camp. The lieutenant decided to choose a fellow subaltern as a flatmate.
During a slack period, the two friends were “out on the town” as usual and after removing a “Men at Work” sign and putting it outside the Nurses’ Home, they decided to check the “talent” at _The Lighthouse_ nightclub in Avondale ... a popular gathering spot for the youth of Salisbury, and where most of the RLI and SAS members met when off duty.
On entering the circular nightclub, they decided that things definitely needed livening up. Everyone appeared subdued. It was the weekend, after all and a bit of merriment was clearly needed.
Our lieutenant returned to his vintage Jaguar which served both as a car and armoury. Selecting the missile of his choice - a teargas grenade - he returned to the club.
Popping his head around the door, he nonchalantly tossed the grenade into the subdued smoke-filled nightclub atmosphere. Then, closing the door behind him, he strolled into the night air, looking like innocence personified, took up a comfortable position outside the club, and waited for the fun to start.
He did not have long to wait - about 4,5 seconds in fact!
It became apparent very quickly to the occupants that something was amiss. The gas attacked their skin, eyes and nasal senses causing immediate respiratory stress ... and not being able to breathe equals panic! Within a matter of seconds the scene in the club changed from tranquility to pandemonium.
Chivalry fell by the wayside as everyone fought for the door, leaving a trail of destruction. Furniture was crushed like matchsticks and the breakages were fantastic. The management disregarded orders to allow customers out first and decided they too must abandon the _Lighthouse_. The fight for fresh air took priority.
Yet, despite the commotion, one enterprising RLI trooper managed to keep his wits about him. Not one to let an opportunity pass him by, he quickly made off with the _Lighthouse_ till - only to be brought down in a rugby tackle by one of the management a few centimetres from the door as he attempted to make good his escape.
The hitherto peaceful scene outside had now taken on a new appearance. People were crying, gasping and vomiting in every direction. Some were bent double leaning over the outer club walls … others were lying prostrate, trying to regain their composure.
It was like a First World War battle scene and the culprit responsible was in hysteria watching it all.
But during the mass confusion, the vigilance of the law remained unimpeded.
It was not long before a policeman spotted our man and asked if he wouldn’t mind assisting them in the investigations.
He was politely asked to open the boot of his car ... and the eyes of the BSAP officer came out on organ stops as the lieutenant’s private arms cache was revealed. Armaments varied from 7,62 millimetre ammunition to thunderflashes to - _teargas grenades_ ... Teargas grenades!
The game was up and our hero was in deep trouble.
By now, his flatmate had decided to retire to his flat and continue his little party with his friends.
The police officer was convinced that a bigger and better arms cache existed somewhere else, and, escorted by the policeman, the lieutenant was asked to proceed to his home for further investigations.
On reaching the flat in one of the city avenues, it was very apparent another party was in progress. Blaring music and hoots of joviality could be heard from the street
As they opened the door, the expression on the policeman’s face was a picture. For the centre piece of the party appeared to be a teddy-bear which was in the process of being roasted on the rotisserie.
A search of the flat unearthed more materials of war, whereupon the two flatmates were invited to accompany the officer to the station.
_The Lighthouse_ culprit was obviously in big trouble. Telephone calls were made to Major Peter Rich, the OC, revealing the sad sorry tale. Hurried visits were made to and from Army HQ and hushed conversations took place at all levels behind closed doors.
Our hero was to be formally charged and would go on trial for a number of offences, varying from disturbing the peace to malicious damage to property.
During the court case, suppressed giggles could be heard through the courtroom as the facts unfolded.
Even the magistrate could be seen biting on his lower lip. An African interpreter - who sat in on every case - was becoming progressively gigglier and finding it very difficult to contain himself, much to the annoyance of the magistrate who had by now taken a grip of his own emotions.
He had almost subdued his desire to burst out laughing when the guilty party was asked why he placed the “Men At Work” sign outside the nurses’ home. When he replied, “I thought it would be a bit of a giggle”, it was all too much for the interpreter and he broke down and howled with mirth.
The lieutenant’s superior officer at the time of Operation _Nickel_ was called to give evidence in mitigation and, because his plea concerned current operations, his evidence was heard in camera.
He must have put up a command performance as he related the brave exploits of the lieutenant He must have played on the stress factor and the fact that the young operational officer had to have some form of emotional release; that his behavior was really only high spirits.
The court accepted this and the young lieutenant was spared a prison sentence in favor of a heavy fine.
He eventually left the Rhodesian Army and went off to fight in the Middle East, where by all accounts, he was held in high esteem.
Out of the bush he was a bit of a nuisance. He was, however, a typical example of a superb operational soldier and a fearless and natural leader.
His men would have followed him anywhere ... even, as one young soldier quipped if it was just out of curiosity…
