It was now blatantly apparent that Rhodesian insurgents were openly collaborating with FRELIMO and had established infiltration routes and bases on a wide front on the Rhodesian north-eastern border. The routes were in constant use serving _Nehanda_ and _Chaminuka_ sectors with logistical and manpower requirements.  
The Rhodesians knew there were two very important crossing points used by the insurgents to get into the country. They were traveling from the Chifombo region of Mozambique down to Umpapi, north of the Zambezi, and from there, they crossed the river at two points.  
Complaining to the Portuguese didn’t do much good. Troops were sent to investigate, but the message coming back to Salisbury was always the same - “No, there’s no one there.”  
Undeterred, the Rhodesians continued to look for an excuse to get back into Mozambique and sort the insurgents out.  
Then, on January 8, 1973, 18 days after the Altena farm attack, at Centenary, there was a new development.  
Three white Rhodesian Government land inspectors, Gerald Hawksworth, Dennis Sanderson and Bob Bland, and their two black messengers, were ambushed as they drove along a lonely road in Mount Darwin in the north-east of the country.  
As the vehicle rounded a bend in the road, there was a sudden burst of machinegun fire and Bob Bland and Dennis Sanderson were cut down, making them the first white civilians to be killed in Rhodesia since May 1966, when Johannes Hendrick Viljoen and his wife were murdered at their remote farmhouse.  
Hawksworth and his African staff were to be spared, but not freed ... and the ZANLA terrorists headed back to Mozambique with their prisoners. The two Africans managed to escape, but Hawksworth was destined to continue marching to Mozambique at the insistence of his captors.  
Here at last was a golden opportunity for the SAS to get back into Mozambique and permission was sought from the Portuguese. After a great deal of diplomatic wrangling and negotiation, the Rhodesians gained permission for the SAS to operate. In depth between the Zambezi River and the Rhodesian/Mozambique border in the Tete Province.  
It was essential that the SAS be deployed secretly in order to gain complete surprise, and to achieve this it was decided to deploy two groups by freefall and static-line parachute.  
(Freefall parachuting had been introduced a year before after the persistent badgering of Brian Robinson and Frank Hales of the Parachute Training School. Frank, an experienced freefaller, who had emigrated to Rhodesia from England, had realized that in terms of the African environment, freefall parachuting - high-altitude, low-opening - had many advantages. The opposition didn’t have much, in the way of sophisticated radar or anti-aircraft devices to detect or reach a plane flying at something like 18000 feet above the ground. It was extremely difficult to hear a plane that far away - and even if the enemy did, they would not be expecting to find paratroopers floating down some time later.)  
One SAS group was to deploy to the west of the Musengezi River some 36 kilometres (22 miles) inside Mozambique where there was one of the known crossing points; the other to the east, near the second crossing point, both about 15 kilometres (nine miles) south of the Zambezi River. Then, having broken down into smaller groups, they were to cut off the infiltration routes and prevent insurgents getting into Rhodesia.  
Before the main body of men arrived, it was imperative that the SAS deploy two four-man freefall pathfinder teams - one for each of the two parachute groups - to ensure the area selected for the main drop was uninhabited.  
Having selected a suitable drop zone and determined the wind speed, the main drop of static-line paratroopers was to be controlled completely by the pathfinder leader. He was to select the run-in direction for the plane, and tell the pilot to go left or right and make corrections if necessary in order to drop the paratroops precisely where he wanted. Then he was to give the “Red light on” instruction, the signal to the dispatchers to shout the “Stand in the door” command to the static-line paratroops.  
Finally, the path finder leader would give the “Green light on” command ... while above, the dispatchers bellowed the “GO” sending the troops tumbling out of the Dakota on their way down to Mozambique.  
Lieutenant Chris Schallenberg was to be the leader of the four-man pathfinder team on the western side of the Musengezi ... the SAS 2IC. Captain Garth Barrett, was to command the other four-man group on the east of the river.  
Finding suitable dropping zones for the main body of static-line paratroopers following them into Mozambique at midnight was not going to be easy, as the two pathfinder teams soon realized when they looked at the maps and aerial photographs of their area. There was just nothing that met the regulation requirements.  
If Army regulations were to be followed, the two DZs had to consist of even, cleared ground 1000 metres long and 750 metres wide. The teams could not find anything that even vaguely looked suitable on their photographs. Hopefully, they would be able to find somewhere once on the ground.  
On January 19, 1973, in the operations room of Two Brigade. Brigadier John Hickman gave a briefing to the SAS troops. It was the first time a brigadier had briefed Rhodesian SAS troops for an operation.  
He told them of ZANLA’s route and the two crossing points and where they were to drop to cut off the gang and, with luck, secure Hawksworth’s release. He said the chances of getting Hawksworth were slim, but they had to kill as many enemy as they could while in there.  
This would prove to the Portuguese that the terrorists were in Mozambique, that there was a route, and that the Portuguese were not doing their job, and stopping them getting to the Rhodesian border. The more they got, the stronger was their case for staying inside Mozambique. The SAS had to get in there and “turn off the tap.”  
Rehearsals were held at the Parachute Training School and on that warm January evening, OC Major Brian Robinson gave the orders for the first Rhodesian airborne military operation outside the country since the counter-insurgency days of Malaya in the 50s.  
It was going to be the first operational free-fall for the pathfinders; the first time free-falling had been used in anger; the first operational static-line descent for most of the Squadron members. And it was to be the first real night descent for many of the young soldiers.  
Excitement and apprehension were in the air. No one knew what to expect, what the terrain was like, how many ZANLA or their FRELIMO comrades roamed the countryside, and if they would land in the middle of a terrorist camp.  
SAS commanders, airmen, Special Branch members and Brigadier Hickman were all gathered to hear Brian Robinson give his orders.  
“In order to remain clandestine:” the SAS commander said, “casualty evacuation will only be carried out if death in the field is imminent”  
The audible gulp of medic Sergeant Richard Thome, echoed through the stunned silent orders group.  
The Dakota with the two pathfinder teams on board was airborne at precisely 17h30 and the plan was to drop the pathfinders just on last light. The timings for the drop were absolutely critical. One minute too early and the freefallers could be seen during daylight. One minute too late and they would not be able to read their altimeters.  
Thirty minutes from drop time Squadron Leader Derek de Kok, of the Parachute Training School, ordered the men to “saddle up” - to get their kit on.  
The military freefaller is a most cumbersome sight dressed up in full equipment. The Bergen rucksack weighing 25 kilograms was secured by hooks and straps behind the knees, with a rifle inverted and strapped to the left shoulder and side.  
The Dak was flying at 11 000 feet to avoid detection from the ground and in heavy equipment at that altitude, with oxygen on, the men were soon perspiring despite the low temperature.  
As the drop time approached, the atmosphere became electric. There was some cautious talk, but they didn’t want to say too much in case their fear showed in their voices.  
Some were laughing, trying to be casual. Others were silent, wondering exactly what emotion Brian Robinson was hoping to see in their faces.  
“Others pretended to nod off to sleep and I was trying to give an air of complete confidence whilst sitting with my stomach in a knot ... and _I_ didn’t have a parachute on my back,” Brian Robinson recalled.  
The new SAS commander was very proud of his lads in the Dak at that moment, he stressed. This was history in the making. Normally a solemn man, that night he was in a cheerful mood.  
The leader of the first pathfinder team, Lieutenant Chris Schollenburg remembers being worried about the jump, but more concerned for the lads who would be parachuting in at midnight by static line. The pathfinders only had a couple of hours to find a suitable dropping zone for them, and it was a great responsibility.  
Conditions were extremely hazy and both the pilot and dispatchers were having great difficulty finding the correct dropping zone.  
But eventually they located the spot south of the Zambezi where they had to drop off the two small teams.  
Five minutes out from the dropping zone, the dispatcher gave the order to number off for the equipment check. Each man labored to his feet, hardly able to support himself under the weight of all his equipment.  
“Eight men okay ... seven men okay,” he said as he checked out their equipment from head to toe. Helmets ... reserves ... handles ... altimeters ... every piece of equipment was checked first by the SAS operators, then by the dispatcher. Then he counted down to “One man okay ... stick okay.”  
Thumbs up, thumbs up. Everyone gave the signal that meant all was well.  
Most of the men attempted to give the impression of joviality as they finished their equipment checks and wished one another good luck.  
Then came the “action stations” command. The team took up their possessions in the aisle.  
Their kit was now weighing very heavy on their backs. They did not have the oxygen now. Everything went quiet. They were particularly anxious at that moment wondering if they would faint; hoping they would not.  
The dispatcher was now in a lying position with his head sticking out of the gaping hole which once contained a door. He was studying the terrain below and wore a mask over his mouth to speak to the pilot to tell him to go left or right, to make the last-minute corrections. The slipstream was distorting his face so much that he looked like something out of a horror movie.  
Chris Schollenberg now stood with both hands on either side of the lights above the door, his right foot forward, minutes away from launching himself into space.  
Now Brian Robinson could sense that the butterflies had disappeared and knew each man was privately going through the well-rehearsed routine ... maintain aircraft heading, arch the body, bring in the hands and legs, check the altimeter, look for other parachutists, track away from them, watch the altimeter, then when the time was right with one last look at the altimeter, hands in and pull the handle.  
“Stand in the door!” shouted the dispatcher at last above the roar of the aircraft’s engines and the rush of the slipstream.  
Schulie removed his hands from the top of the door and placed them at waist level on either side of the door.  
The green light came on.  
“GO!” screamed the dispatcher, at 18h50 above the noise from the engine, slapping Schulie on the back of the calf.  
In less than three seconds, Schulie was gone, falling through the evening to a spot south of the Zambezi River. He was followed by Corporal Danny Smith, Lance Corporal Dave Cale and Sergeant Frank Wilmot.  
Five minutes later the second team led by Captain Garth Barrett and his team of Lieutenant Ron Marillier, Pete Marshall and _Horse_ Green left the aircraft just as darkness descended.  
The first stick fell to earth and were heading for more or less where they wanted to land. There was the flat countryside, the little bit of a ravine they had seen on the aerial photographs.  
At 10 000 feet, Dave Cale, the third man out of the plane, watched in horror as Frank Wilmot, the number four man who should have been stacked up high above him, came spinning past him. His parachute was not open.  
Frank was in a right-hand spin and getting faster and faster ... and Dave Calc and Danny Smith were utterly helpless to do anything to assist him as they floated down. There was no way they could see him getting out of the spin.  
At 2 000 feet, Schulie pulled the rip cord of his parachute. It opened and he looked up to see a couple of parachutes crack open as his team obeyed orders and pulled at the regulation height of 2 500 feet.  
It was then that he saw Frank Wilmot hurtling down. He was still in a right-hand spin. Neither his main parachute nor his reserve was out  
“PULL!” the pathfinder leader bellowed at the top of his voice as Frank spun past him. But there was no reaction.  
“Oh my God!” thought Schulie immediately, giving himself a fright at having shouted. If there were any terrorists skulking around below them, he would have blown their entry for sure.  
Schulte, Dave Cale and Danny Smith were still up high in the sunlight. Below, the dusk had fallen on that Friday evening as Frank continued spinning earthwards.  
The lack of light below prevented Schulie getting a clear picture, but he distinctly saw Frank land in an open patch, then saw a puff of dust as he hit the side of a little gully.  
There had been no flowering of a parachute. Neither Frank’s main nor his reserve chute had opened. The pathfinder leader knew there was no hope for him. He had spun into the ground.  
Meanwhile, Major Brian Robinson as yet unaware of the tragedy and flying some - where over Mozambique sat anxiously waiting for the reports from below. The news when it came, shocked him to the core and as Schulie’s guttural Afrikaans voice came over the aircraft’s VHF radio, his first words were to remain with him for the rest of his life.  
“This is Pappa-One,” Schulie said. “One of my men has gone straight into the ground.”  
“We were all initially stunned and then a spate of thoughts as to what should be done next shot through my mind,” the SAS commander recalled.  
“How was I going to find the body? If I did, how was I going to recover it without giving the game away? Should I cancel the whole operation?  
“Forcing myself to think clearly, I decided to continue with the operation, but decided against telling the rest of the squadron of the death. Having sworn the aircrews to secrecy and hearing the all’s well from Captain Garth Barrett over in the second pathfinder group, they set course for New Sarum arriving at the Parachute Training hangar where the rest of the Squadron waited at 20h00.”  
As he hurried into the hangar, he was appalled to see the Army padre handing out Bibles to a group of bewildered SAS soldiers.  
“Jesus!” quipped Sergeant Pete Cole. “I remember being frightened at Aden, but this really takes the cake!”  
Convinced that the padre had been told of the parachuting death, Brian Robinson threatened the well-meaning padre with violence if he put the wind up his men.  
He found out later that the padre knew nothing of the death of Frank Wilmot, but had merely gone out to the Parachute School to wish the boys well. But it was a most ill-timed visit as far as Robinson was concerned.  
By 23h00, the static-line paratroops had boarded the two waiting Daks and the aircraft had set course for Mozambique.  
Meanwhile on the western side of the Musengezi River, Schulie had already landed and watched the rest of his pathfinder team touch down safely.  
They regrouped bundled up their parachutes and cached them. “Right let’s see if we can find Frank.” Schulie said to his team.  
They had a quick look but without success. It was already dark and they were under a lot of pressure to find a suitable dropping zone for the static-line paratroopers coming in a couple of hours time. They would have to abandon the search for Frank for now, get cracking and find a DZ before what visibility there was disappeared altogether.  
They moved off counting their paces and their times, with Schulie using a compass, so that they could return to the spot later and resume the search.  
They trudged on through the bush, and with each step they took they worried that they would never find an open space within the limited time frame. The other lads due to jump that night would not thank them for the broken bones they would undoubtedly sustain if they got the all-clear to jump in such wooded terrain.  
But the trees did not thin out and Schulie decided there was nothing for it but to keep on walking through the night until they heard the drone of the Dakota above them.  
When they did hear the plane, the terrain had not improved and they were still surrounded by trees.  
“Right, we are ready to jump,” came a voice from above towards midnight “Have you got a DZ for us?”  
“Negative,” Schulie radioed back. “There’s no DZ and that’s that. The guys can jump, but it’s all trees down here.”  
It was the second serious problem that night. For the entire operational deployment had revolved around two separate DZs.  
Captain Garth Barrett, leader of the other pathfinder team, had by now come up on his radio to report finding a DZ on the eastern side of the Musengezi. The first one they had found was strewn with large rocks and they had pressed on looking for another. By 23h00, they had found one with fewer rocks and less danger to the paratroopers as it consisted mainly of trees ... and Brian Robinson now decided to deploy both callsigns into Barrett’s area.  
It meant that the group which should have been working in Schulie’s area under the command of Captain Howard Inman would face a fifty kilometre (32 miles) trek through the bush to join up with him.  
At midnight, Garth Barrett’s radio crackled into life as the pilot told him of the arrival of the main body of paratroopers. Soon the drone of the aircraft’s engines could be heard and the pathfinder team guided the Dakotas on to their position and directed the drop.  
Then all the paratroopers leapt out at Barrett’s DZ. Except that was not really a DZ either!  
They had to take their chances among trees, small rocks and uneven, unsuitable terrain, for there was hardly a clear space at all. The DZ was purely a figment of the pathfinder’s imagination, they discovered.  
The deployment had also become the first operational night drop without a proper DZ!  
Amazingly, save for the broken ankle sustained by New Zealander, Lieutenant Martin Knight-Willis when he landed on a small rock, the drop went without a hitch.  
Perhaps the regulations did state that a DZ ought to consist of a cleared piece of ground 1 000 metres long and 750 metres wide! The SAS certainly had news for whoever wrote the regulations.  
Despite Brian Robinson’s earlier instructions that there would be no casevac unless death was imminent, he sent a chopper to recover Martin Knight-Willis. Another was already on its way to collect Frank Wilmot’s body. Brian realized that it was an _Alice in Wonderland_ idea to expect so many men to operate behind enemy lines without air support  
Schulie and his team were already making their way back to their original DZ, counting their steps as they travelled over the flat, featureless countryside. They were to await the arrival of the chopper on its way to collect Frank Wilmot’s body. But first, they had to find him.  
At about 02h00 they realized they were back in the area of their original DZ. It was an amazing stroke of luck For even meticulously counting their paces was not guaranteed to produce accurate results. specially at night over countryside with no features to make the job easier.  
They found the cache of parachutes, then, aided by the light from the moon, started searching for Frank’s body.  
Three hundred metres from their cache, Danny Smith suspected they were in the right area. Then he saw a glint in the moonlight. Closer examination revealed that it was an army ration tin which had burst from Frank’s pack on impact with the ground.  
They found Frank at the bottom of a sandstone gully next to a tiny tree. They were working at such a rate that the horror of their find did not sink in at the time.  
The canopy of Frank’s main parachute trailed behind him up the gully. The rigging lines were neatly folded and it was clear they had only come out of their sleeve on impact. The reserve was open beneath him and puffing up around him. It was obvious that the main and reserve canopies had burst open only when Frank smashed into the ground and skidded down the gully.  
Schulie and Danny turned Frank over on to his back and folded the reserve parachute over him, careful not to disturb anything. They carried him to a safe spot, then once more searched around for a landing place for the chopper.  
Again they could not locate one - and at 04h00 chopper pilot. Flight-Lieutenant Peter Woolcock, radioed he was near them.  
“My friend,” said Schulie “We are sorry, but there’s no LZ. Can _you_ find one?” “No problem!” replied the Flight-Lieutenant, “I know where you are.”  
As the pilot and his technician, Bob Mackie, flew along the Musengezi River. The moon virtually disappeared … and as they got closer to the pathfinder team, they switched off their landing lights and flew in almost total darkness. They had no idea if there were any enemy in the area, and had no desire to attract attention to the pathfinders.  
Suddenly, the pilot picked up Schulie’s torch flashing out its urgent signal through the darkness.  
He came down cutting his way through a tree to land in the gully, the blast from the rotor blades sending the grass dancing like waves on the ocean. Only in those last few crucial moments before touch-down did the pilot switch on his landing lights. Then, as soon as he landed he cut his engines to reduce the risk of compromise.  
It was remarkable flying and something the security forces were to become accustomed to over the years.  
Frank Wilmot’s body was loaded on board. Schulie knew there would be an investigation and told the pilot that was exactly how they found Frank and that they had not disturbed any of the equipment.  
The chopper lifted, the pilot and technician gave a wave and then they were off again, skimming the tree tops and heading for home.  
Theories about Frank’s death varied from the spin causing him to black-out ... to a parachute malfunction ... or its wrapping around his body. As both the reserve and the main canopy deployed on impact, the true story will never be known.  
A member of the Parachute Training School recalled that Frank had an automatic opening device on his reserve parachute but it was impossible to determine whether or not it had worked, and, if it had, whether his body attitude had prevented the correct deployment.  
When body and equipment were taken to the mortuary, someone removed the parachute and equipment. Investigators conducting the subsequent Board of Inquiry were presented with everything in a huge bundle and were thus unable to determine what, if anything, had gone wrong with the parachutes.  
Captain Howard Inman who had to jump out at Garth Barrett’s DZ instead of at Schellenberg’s, led his men on the long arduous trek westwards to rendezvous with the first pathfinder team. They walked all day in the sweltering January heat, and eventually the tired team, drenched in perspiration, reached the banks of the Musengezi River only to find it in full flood.  
Howard stared in disbelief at the 100 metre torrent that separated them from Schulie’s team, aware that the longer they lingered, the greater the danger of their being seen. But soon they found a dug-out canoe carelessly left on the bank of the river by a local fisherman. They stripped of and swam the raging river, ferrying the dug-out back and forth until all their kit and equipment was safely on the other side.  
All reached the safety of the opposite bank uneventfully, donned their uniforms and started out on the final leg of the journey to link up with Schulie and his team.  
Three days after the first pathfinder group had dropped into Mozambique, the two groups met up. Half expecting them to have a morale problem after having wrapped up Frank Wilmot, Howard Inman greeted Schulie and said he bet they were glad to see them.  
“No, no, no!” replied Schulte who had already been busy conducting one-man missions. “I like being by myself.”  
It was the first intimation his friends had that Schulie enjoyed operating by himself, or in very small groups, unlike others who preferred the group feeling. It was a modus operandi that was ultimately to make him a legend in Rhodesian military history.  
The SAS then broke down into call signs in their search for the enemy, and Captan Garth Barren in charge of one group soon found an ideal ambush position. The Captain and his partner, Stan Hornby, were dug in on either side of a huge anthill and a massive tree hid them from view from the path below.  
They were at their post as usual one morning and Stan was beginning to think the terrorists would never come when suddenly Garth whispered a warning that two men were approaching.  
Stan looked from behind his anthill to see men walking next to each other coming down the track. Both were totally off guard, carrying SKS rifles with bayonets fixed slung over their shoulders.  
They passed in front of the ambushers. Garth Barren sent a round towards the man at the back and he slumped to earth, mortally wounded. His companion fled, dropping his rifle in his panic.  
Luckily the dead FRELIMO was carrying a letter and although it was in Portuguese, the SAS picked out the name _Hawksworth_.  
It asked the FRELIMO commander of that particular Sector to allow Hawksworth and his captors to pass through on their way to his ultimate destination. It was the nearest they were to come to Gerald Hawksworth, and it was certainly better than the Army and hierarchy had hoped for anyway.  
Hawksworth was force-marched at gunpoint more than 1600 kilometres (1 000 miles) through Rhodesia and Mozambique before finishing up in a Flea-ridden Tanzanian jail. A British subject, he was used as a ZANU propaganda prize in a bid to get recognition for the party in exile, and was released a year later after representation by the British Government  
While Hawksworth was stumbling through Mozambique, the SAS were familiarizing themselves with the terrain and procedures that would become second nature to them over the years.  
In previous operations, they had normally been involved in border control where people did not bother too much about snoring or banging their mess tins.  
But all that had changed overnight, Men were beginning to get upset about how much noise a neighbour made when he shook out his bivvy or rattled his mess tin with his spoon. Noise could compromise them, alert terrorists to their presence. It could have fatal consequences.  
Schulie had always been aware of these problems and when he first joined the squadron from his native South Africa, he was eyed with a certain amount of suspicion.  
He camouflaged all his kit - his spoons ... mess tins ... notebooks ... Even his locker at camp was sprayed camouflage colors. It would not be long however before the others realized the advantages of camouflage.  
Nothing annoyed Schulie more in the bush than a man coughing. To Schulie it was inexcusable.  
His particular call sign happened to have two members afflicted with this irritating habit and the worst offender, a certain Fred, quickly earned the apt nickname _The Cougher_.  
“If you can’t control your cough - and it’s all psychological anyway,” the lieutenant threatened, “I’m going to leave you behind.”  
Fred obviously thought it was an idle threat and continued to cough, and, as a result, when they based up at night, Fred and his mate were dropped off 500 metres and sometimes as much as a kilometre away from the rest of the callsign.  
Schulies’ idea was that if Fred coughed at night the terrorists would find him and not the others!  
They really didn’t expect too much from Fred as his coughing tended to override everything else. Then one day Fred was left on guard while the various callsigns awaited the arrival of a resupply plane. Suddenly, two shots rang out from Fred’s direction.  
Everyone raced to find _The Cougher_ proudly standing over two terrorists, one dead, the other wounded in the head. Even Schulie was impressed - not that he let Fred back into base at night!  
The operation lasted almost a month and as the rainy season was in full swing, the SAS were soaked day and night. They accounted for many totally unprepared enemy who didn’t have a clue that the Rhodesians were abroad in what was assumed to be friendly terrain.  
Cameras were dropped in and dead terrorists were photographed to prove to the Portuguese that ZANLA were indeed operating in Mozambique, and to build up the squadron’s case that the SAS should stay in Mozambique.  
The squadron captured many arms, picked up when running ZANLA dropped everything in an effort to get away. Their haul included the first RPG·7 rocket launcher captured in the war.  
The SAS were in Mozambique chasing terrorists in their home bases, hitting them before they could infiltrate into Rhodesia. And they were in officially. For having got in there, they began picking up definite signs of enemy camps, some jointly shared by FRELIMO and ZANLA and which the Portuguese knew nothing about.  
The situation gave the SAS a valid reason to stay in Mozambique and the Portuguese gave approval. Big real estate was about to become the SAS’s business.  
