The average British SAS man is a unique specimen in his late twenties with years of military experience in other units before volunteering for the Special Air Service. Except on formal occasions, 22 SAS do not wear badges of rank, and communications among the ranks is normally done on a first name basis.
But it was all very different in the Rhodesian SAS - and it was basically because they had no choice.
When Brian Robinson returned from England after his attachment with 22 SAS, he argued that the average SAS trooper had to be 25 with at least three years’ service. But because of the chronic manpower shortage throughout the Rhodesian Army, he realised even as he advocated such a policy, it was an impossible dream.
The average age of the Rhodesian soldier, therefore, was under 21, and towards the end of the war, most SAS members had no previous military experience before joining.
They wore their rank badges except on operations, and officers were addressed as “Sir” - although Brian Robinson readily concedes to having heard some bold souls mutter on a couple of occasions: “Spelt with a C!”
This was not the SAS’s own ostentation, however, merely a Rhodesian Army system they were obliged to abide by. From the top downwards, the system was that NCOs were addressed by their rank. and other ranks by their surnames.
Generally, the SAS abided by this rule, but much use was also made of Christian names and nicknames, for it was very difficult to remain aloof when part of a fourman patrol on a six-week operation.
The Rhodesians certainly envied 22 SAS their access to trained manpower. Nevertheless, Brian Robinson felt that the SAS founder, David Stirling would have been proud of the Rhodesians wearing the coveted sand-coloured beret.
Initially, the 1st Battalion, The Rhodesian Light Infantry, was a good source of volunteers to the SAS, and numbers were also boosted by men from foreign armies or those from the signals’ engineers and occasionally the air force or police. Although already trained, they still had to undergo the rigours of the SAS’s special training and selection course. Not all made the grade either.
Eventually, the RLI complained that just as they were getting men trained, so the SAS were poaching them, and in the end, the SAS more or less agreed not to look to the RLI for recruits.
Then the Selous Scouts was formed and the SAS’s strength dropped to 25 men.
There was simply no other source of manpower available to the SAS and it was then that Brian Robinson embarked on two different ventures, which, despite tremendous opposition from qualified SAS men, was to work exceptionally well. He decided that the only solution was to train their own men from scratch - to take raw recruits straight out of school and into the army to do their compulsory national service … rather than wait until they had finished their basic training in some other unit as in the past.
The beauty of the plan was that they did not have to sort out a man’s bad military habits. They could take him straight off the street and teach him SAS discipline and methods, and orientate him to the SAS’s way of thinking right from day one.
It was a unique idea and totally contrary to the SAS doctrine according to the 22nd chapter. But, as the Rhodesians were to learn, it was amazing what they were able to develop through rigorous training and practical work with more experienced colleagues.
Whereas 22 SAS selected their men first then trained them, the Rhodesians were to do it the other way around - train them, then select them.
The “All-In”, the culmination of a recruit’s training, a testing exercise to see if he had assimilated all the SAS skills before being awarded his SAS beret and belt, was now to be scrapped.
Brian felt that to put a recruit on “All-In” when they desperately needed the manpower was wasting time.
The answer was to give a soldier the real thing, the best test of all. He would have to prove himself under battle conditions in the bush. He would carry a rifle and be expected to fight.
It meant that the SAS would have to be extremely careful. Putting a new man in a four-man patrol was 25 percent of the patrol and lives other than his own would be at stake. Brian Robinson acknowledged that it was a bit much to ask a seasoned soldier to take a new man along, but there was no choice. They needed the men and it had to be done.
However, although a recruit would go on patrol, he would not receive his SAS belt and beret until he had proved himself operationally. It might take several bush trips before he was badged - and even then he was not “safe”, as his beret could be taken away at any time, just as it could with other more experienced operators.
Despite the urgent need for manpower, the standard of training and selection remained high right to the end of the war. There was still a 75 percent failure rate during selection and on one course not a single recruit was considered good enough for the SAS.
The second revolutionary idea to bolster numbers was to take in TA men, civilians (often former SAS men) on call-up with other security force units who had already received some form of military training However, as they were trained men, it was not necessary for them to do the entire recruit course. They joined the recruits during the final phase of selection with the officers having to do additional tasks.
There was the inherent security problem in taking in TA men, and the SAS hierarchy were worried that in view of the sensitive nature of SAS operations, there might be a security leak.
But Brian Robinson was realistic enough to concede that despite the most stringent precautions, leaks occur in the best of circles.
(It is unheard of in other armies for regular and TA troops to work together on active operations. Generally too, the regulars in those forces consider TA troops inferior. But in the Rhodesian SAS, this unique relationship was a success. As the TA troops were called up so often - and because they were mostly former SAS men anyway - they were accepted by the regular SAS troops as a working force and as equals.)
While the methods of SAS training varied to some extent over the years, the basic idea remained the same - to see if a man had the mental and physical stamina to do the job and to see if he was compatible.
To determine that meant reducing a recruit to the lowest form of life … to exhaust him, then see if he could think under stress.
While an SAS soldier had to be able to act as an individual on his own initiative, he also had to spend long periods in very small groups across the border, and compatability was absolutely essential.
To live cbeek-by-jowi on the wrong side of the fence for six weeks with someone who ate noisily, had a permanent sniff, or picked his ear, could have disastrous results for the offender.
Idiosyncracies which were not irritating in normal circumstances could become so magnified that by the end of a six-week bush trip. one soldier could end up wanting to kill another in the same callsign.
If a man’s character was such that this type of reaction was likely after ten days instead of six weeks, then he was not the sort of man the SAS wanted.
Positive, quick-thinking self-disciplined people were the men the SAS needed.
Stamina. fitness, endurance, initiative, courage, compatibility, individuality and logic were the criteria.
It was not necessarily the supermen, the six-footers with the bulging muscles, who made the grade either. As Brian Robinson once pointed out. any reasonably fig Rhodesian could pass selection and a candidate didn’t have to be able to swim across Lake Kariba with a knife between his teeth.
Experience proved that it was often the large fit rugby players who were the first to give up and fall by the wayside, whereas others who had the right mental attitude would switch offand doggedly stagger on, regardless of how many times the instructors goaded them and did their best to encourage them to give up.
The SAS wanted people who, even if they fell down exhausted, would not give up.
From the outset, the Who Dares Wins motto took on a very real meaning.
Over the years, a variety of people ran the selection courses, each with his own idea of what selection should be and resulting in a variety of standards being set.
Brian Robinson conceded that occasionally some training officers went a bit too far in trying to get their standards high, and were just being cruel for the sake of it. It was something the hierarchy had to watch.
According to some critics - themselves involved in training - the selection courses, run at Inyangombe Mountain, Inyanga, the highest mountain in the country, became predictable.
While Inyangombe Mountain was rugged terrain and had to be taken seriously, the same rendezvous spots were used time and again for the speed marches and some enterprising recruits arranged for friends to give them lifts. In some respects this was accepted and as long as a recruit was not caught, he did not necessarily fail selection because of it.
Then, at about the time Brian Robinson decided to train youngsters fresh from school and take in TA, a couple of other changes were made that were to make a marked difference to the SAS’s training methods.
Captain Rob Johnstone was appointed permanent training officer, thus providing the continuity that was so necessary to ensure that the standard remained the same from one selection course to another.
His team of instructors also remained fairly constant over the years too, and while they were masters at dreaming up new endurance and initiative exercises, by the same token they knew just how far they could push recruits.
Rob Johnstone. who was the training officer for five years, was instrumental in getting the venue of the arduous selection course changed from Inyangombe in the east to the Matopos in the west.
By the mid-70s, the war had begun to hot up and lnyanga had become part of the operational area. As recruits had to use dirt roads on selection, there was the very real problem of mine warfare to consider.
The Matopos was ideally suited to SAS needs and tested not only recruits’ endurance but their map-reading abilities, too. Unlike Inyanga, it was impossible to see any of the rendezvous points either.
Even if the training staff had used the same RVs over and over again - which they did not - the Matopos was so rugged and remote that it was largely impassable to vehicle traffic, and certainly out of the question for recruits to arrange lifts with their friends.
Initially, training and selection courses took place over six months, but because of the desperate need for men in the bush, the training staff had the task of transforming raw schoolboys into hardened men in just four months.
They started each course with about 150 recruits chosen from the thousands of 18-year-old school leavers who reported to Llewellin Barracks, Bulawayo, for their compulsory national service. The national servicemen had numerous options open to them as to their choice of unit or corps they wanted to join.
Rob Johnstone and his training team had to sell the SAS idea to them but the problem was how to tell a bunch of schoolboys what the SAS was about and, at the same time, because of the sensitive nature of SAS operations and the need for security, not tell them what the unit’s role was on ops.
To capture their imagination, they displayed the various SAS specialist equipment - the diving gear, the canoes, and the enemy heavy weapons ...
Having selected their nucleus of schoolboys, it was back to Salisbury where training began in earnest. It was stressed from the outset - just as it had been down the years - that a recruit could withdraw from the course at any time he wished, and that if he did, it would not be a disgrace. By the same token, he could be kicked off at any time.
Rob Johnstone’s main criterion for selecting a Rhodesian SAS soldier was simple: “Would I take this bloke with me on a punch-up with the terrs?”
The recruits began their soldiering careers with a six-week period of basic training during which they were taught map-reading signals and medics, and familiarised themselves with their own weapons and those of the enemy.
Rhodesian SAS men were renowned for their exceptionally high standard of shooting and, apart from one entire day spent dry shooting, recruits used live rounds on training, unlike the rest of the security force recruits, who used blanks.
The use of blanks led to wild shooting, a loss of control and a waste of ammunition - and that was not wanted in the SAS.
Blanks tended to give recruits a false sense of security and it was found that as soon as they began using live rounds, they were so busy concentrating on the bangs going off around them, that they forgot to listen to their orders.
By getting recruits used to a heavy-noise situation from the outset, they had confidence and did not hold back when it came to the real thing.
Using realism from the start was to pay handsome dividends for the SAS, and it was a rare occasion indeed when an ammunition resupply had to be called for during an operation.
To improve recruits’ shooting the worst shottist of the week had the dubious honour of being presented with the SAS’s special _Shit Shot Bell_.
On receiving the large cow bell, the hapless winner had to do a victory lap of honour accompanied by the clanging of the bell - and worse still the humiliating sound of applause from the rest of his course.
Then, he had to give a quick talk on how he had managed to qualify for the award and wear the bell around his neck for seven days until he could hand it over to the next holder. Needless to say, shooting accuracy picked up remarkably.
As fitness was one of the requisites for a Special Air Service soldier, the recruits ran everywhere for the entire twenty weeks of their training and selection.
SAS operators always knew that there were recruits somewhere in camp by the unmistakable clanging of the _Shit Shot Bell_ as the new boys, their young bronzed bodies bathed in sweat, sprinted somewhere on another leg of their training.
By the time their basic training was over, the instructors were left with a hundred recruits.
They now moved down to the Gwaai River Mine - a former copper mine - north of Wankie National Park where all their field work, tactical training patrols, map-reading, canoeing and demolitions were done, the main emphasis being on their quick shooting and ability to practise the basic principles of war.
The whole idea of the six-weeks Gwaai phase was to be as authentic as possible ... to enable recruits to see what the real war would be like, set in rugged bushy terrain under realistic conditions.
The tactical training included splitting recruits into two teams: one to build a proper COIN warfare terror camp from where they would do their patrolling and organise their guard systems - the other to patrol and locate the camp. Then having found the base, they would set up their observation posts and keep watch on the camp.
The groups would then change over, with the “terrorist” camp growing bigger the second time around as the new group continued building.
It was a very intensive phase and everything from classical warfare to an attack on their newly-built camp was included. By the time this phase came to an end, the recruits had become fairly conversant with the whole war situation and were able to lead their own patrols.
Sweating it out behind a school desk was child’s play compared to their new lifestyle. They got up at 04h30 for a PT session, ran everywhere, worked all day and invariably attended lectures until 21h00.
During the last ten days at Gwaai, officers and NCOs from other units, and TA men wanting to get into the SAS, would join the course. They would be given revision work, a series of separate exercises and a group of recruits to work with, enabling the instructors to assess their knowledge. The officers would also be expected to give military appreciations on the unconventional SAS type of operations.
This phase culminated in an attack on their terror camp, when they were tested on their lessons learned. The officers and NCOs had to give complete orders and organise the recruits for the attack.
Then followed the really hard part - the final selection to see if a recruit had what it takes to become an SAS soldier.
By this stage, more recruits had dropped out - and the course was left with between 50-70 percent of its original members.
Gone, too, were all the schoolboys. They were now a superbly fit bunch of tough men who had reached such a pitch that to have put them through a selection course straight away would have been pointless.
The idea now was to physically wear them down and soften them up before selection.., to repeatedly take them up to a certain stage and then let them relax: to bring everyone down to the same level and to give each man an equal advantage.
They now moved to Llewellin Barracks, Bulawayo, for the dreaded and intensive pre-selection _Rev_ phase which included a series of arduous tasks thought up by the instructors. The _Rev_ was split into hour-long stints during which the recruits boxed, ran, played baseball, wrestled in a mud bath, had a tug-of-war competition, PT sessions, swam and among other equally exhausting activities, competed in a chariot race in which they pulled the instructors around in vehicle trailers.
The instructors worked them up to such a state that they could barely move and after each physically exhausting stint, they would let the recruits relax, it was the sitting down part which failed most recruits … they would simply not get up again. Most stints were done carrying a rifle and a heavy steel ball.
Meal times were just something they thought about ... and as they were not allowed to speak to each other either, the only things which past their lips were water, glucose, salt tablets - and hushed curses.
One incentive to give up was a fresh meal. It was certainly a tempting inducement.
And all the time, the training team kept telling them what a waste of rations they were, urging them to give up, trying to wear them down.
Eventually, this phase was over and the instructors were down to about thirty determined recruits. Those lucky enough to get through the rigours of pre-selection were rewarded with the greasiest of eggs, the weakest of coffees.
Finally, the still-hungry recruits were taken to the rugged Matopos mountains for the last leg of their SAS training, the all-important selection course.
They were dropped off at last light and told that their next RV would be at 18h00 the next day. Then Rob Johnstone put on a command performance and cursed his team for forgetting to bring the correct map and instructor Nick Breytenbach would join in the little act. mumble his apologies and throw a huge bundle of maps at the recruits’ feet.
By then Rob Johnstone would be reeling off a six-figure grid reference of where they were and another of where the recruits were to go to.
As the recruits tried to get their torches to work and began scrambling for their notebooks, Rob Johnstone and team would let out their clutches and roar off, leaving them to get to their rendezvous by themselves. Just for company, they had to take along a tin trunk full of iron, or a log.
It would be the first time in four months they had been left completely to themselves.
Having been dumped at the foot of the mountains, the first thing the recruits would do was to collapse in a heap and eat all their rations.
Then the squabbling would begin as to who should carry the log or trunk, and which way they should go.
Various men would begin to assert their authority, and having finally decided that a massive hill was the best route to take, they would eventually stagger off carrying their log and their 4,5 kilogram (10 lb) loaded rifles, while weighed down with their tortuous 36 kilogram (80 lb) Bergens, and the steel balls still in their hands.
They had long ago got used to the weight of SAS packs. Regular soldiers in other units often found it hard to believe how much kit SAS operators had to hump around the hush. Many found difficulty in even lifting an SAS Bergen off the ground and SAS packs became legendary.
The training team could not have chosen a more rugged, punishing spot in the whole of the country for the selection phase. Uphill was very definitely uphill and downhill was decidedly downhill.
The bush was thick, there was quite a lot of game, and wherever they went in the Matopos they were bound to hit a rough patch.
The hills were strewn with giant boulders and there were a number of false crests.
Just as they got to the top of one, so they were confronted with another.
Even if they climbed to the top of the nearest hill, which could only be done in a circuitous mute, there were very few hills where they could see the whole area. And generally when they got to the bottom again, they were disorientated.
Their 15 kilometre (nine mile) trek would take them all that night, and often they would fall asleep on their way after the hardships of their _Rev_ phase.
There would still be a lot of haggling and name-calling particularly over the tin trunk, which would not go around corners and kept getting stuck in trees and bushes.
They were under a lot of pressure, too, as they had been told there was a deadline to meet Unknown to them. the time-frame didn’t really matter that much to the instructors. They were more interested in knowing how the recruits operated as a team.
Eventually, they would stagger into the RV, and if the instructors were not there to meet them, they would have left a map and a message to meet them further along the route, just to get the recruits in a worse frame of mind.
If they had not shaved or cleaned their weapons or kit by the time they met up with the instructors, they would get another steel ball to carry for the next phase.
The instructors would then quizz them on their buddy rating - who in order of preferenee they would want to work with again, and who they thought was no good.
It was a very revealing exercise, and if there was a borderline case as to whether a recruit passed or failed, the instructors would refer back to the buddy rating and make their final decision based on that finding
Then followed the individual effort - a one-day hike Recruits were dropped off at different points along the road, told where they were, given a map, told their RV point and the time they were to get there.
Just to make things interesting the roneoed maps had all the roads and paths removed and each recruit had to map-read his way through the hills, not an easy task in the Matopos where many of the hills were only ten metres high and not depicted on maps anyway.
Finally, there was a speed march in which they had to cover 25 kilometres (15 miles) in five hours. So determined were recruits by this stage that the average time was three-and-a-half hours.
After four extremely hard months, with the constant worry hanging over them of not knowing whether they would shape up or not, the sheer delight of being told they were good enough for one of the world’s most formidable units can only be imagined, and reduced many to tears.
After passing selection, they did their parachute course; then joined the troops and went to the bush to prove themselves operationally, each soldier on his way to becoming an elite, specially-chosen operator - a man among men.
