By 1976, tensions were running high in the sub-continent. It was the era of the Angolan war, of revolution and of white mercenaries ... and the SAS men preparing to visit neighbouring black- ruled Malawi would have to be very careful.  
Although Rhodesia and Malawi had no light with each other, the Malawi Youth Wing was very active and could be expected to be alert to the possibility of trouble. The discovery of six “mercenaries” in their midst would be a prize indeed.  
Malawi did not harbour anti-Rhodesian insurgents and it was one place that the SAS didn’t normally go visiting. It was, however, geographically well situated to play a part in an operation against ZANLA lines of communication, and as such, offered the SAS a back-door route into Mozambique.  
It had been learnt that ZANLA were moving weaponry to the Rhodesian border over a bridge in northern Mozambique, but because the bridge was out of helicopter  reach, a much more elaborate manoeuvre was necessary to get the SAS saboteurs and their explosives to the target. Thus it was that six SAS men landed one of the most interesting missions that year.  
Passing themselves off as tourists, they were to fly to the Malawian capital of Blantyre ... then travel down to the border with Mozambique in hired transport, where, after taking delivery of a consignment of explosives at a bush airstrip, they would nip across the unmarked boundary into northern Mozambique and march to the bridge.  
The homework had been done and Major Brian Robinson and Captain _Big John_ Murphy, the mission commander, had already spied out the land, examined the airstrip and walked the distance to the target An aerial photographic reconnaissance of the bridge had been carried out and the explosives prepared from the interpretation.  
The six operators had been selected both for their demolitions experience and for their foreign passports. _Big John_ was American. the others, South African and British.  
Even though businessmen and tourists travelled to and fro between the two countries, it was imperative that these particular tourists did not appear connected in any way with Rhodesia. It was essential, too, that their passports did not reveal they were involved with the military.  
Any reference to having been in South Africa in the preceding months was carefully removed by the backroom boys of the Central Intelligence Organisation, who also issued them with doctored vaccination certificates and had stamped their passports with the latest immigration stamps.  
Arriving uneventfully in Malawi, the SAS made their way to the rendezvous point near the Malawi-Mozambique border to await the arrival of their explosives.  
As dusk approached at the little bush airstrip, three operators lay low in the bushes. ready to offload the special cargo the moment the plane touched down ... while at the opposite end of the airstrip, their hired Land-Rover stood parked with its bonnet up. Every so often, _Big John_ Murphy gave it a kick to convince the locals it had broken down, hoping to distract them while the plane landed.  
Brian Robinson was to bring in the explosives in the Rhodesian Prime Minister’s official aircraft Which had been freshly painted for the mission and was sporting a Malawian registration number.  
The airstrip dipped sharply at one end which luckily, was the end furthest away from a cluster of houses.  
The plan was that the aircraft would land, turn around at the bottom, and as soon as it was out of sight, the explosives would be offloaded. The plane would taxi up the runway to give the impression it had landed in the wrong place.  
In the event of anything going wrong, two of the operators were to run up the centre of the airfield, whereupon the plane would circle and fly home again without landing.  
Precisely at the appointed time, the three SAS men waiting in the bushes heard the hum of a plane coming from the south.  
As they glanced down the airstrip to check all was well, they saw to their horror two Africans sprinting down the runway. It was their signal that something was amiss: that the mission was off ... and it couldn’t have happened at a worse time.  
But fortunately good luck was with them. It wasn’t yet dark and Brian Robinson was able to see that the men running along the airstrip were Africans and got the pilot to land just as planned.  
In the dip at the bottom of the airstrip, the door of the plane swung open and Major Robinson enquired: “How’s it going?” Then he stretched out his hand in true Rhodesian fashion to indicate he wanted to shake hands and wish them well. But there was no time for idle banter, even if he was the boss.  
“I haven’t got time for that now,” said lain Bowen, as the three operators snatched up the five heavy Bergens containing the explosives and staggered off to the safety of the bushes.  
The doors slammed shut, the plane tumed and headed off down the runway. It rose into the evening and then was gone ... Soon, all fell silent again.  
The sudden appearance of the plane had not aroused the slightest suspicion. It was merely some pilot who had landed in the wrong place, then, realising his mistake, had taken off again.  
Besides, the locals were far too interested in the “broken down” Land-Rover. By now a large crowd had gathered and everyone was offering advice on how best to fix the troublesome vehicle.  
Eventually, they were persuaded to leave and the three operators darted from the bushes, lugging their explosives with them. They piled into the vehicle and headed off for the drop-off point near the unmarked Malawi-Mozambique border.  
Leaving Iain Bowen to drive back to Blantyre, the five-man bridge-blowing team crossed unseen into Mozambique and tramped off to the target But unfortunately for the Rhodesians, that was where their luck ran out. The aerial photographic interpretation had been wrong and the SAS had insufficient explosives with them to demolish the bridge properly. They did, however, manage to crack the foundations. putting it out of commission for many months, slowing down ZANLA’s anTIS supplies to Rhodesia and causing the enemy considerable inconvenience.  
lain Bowen was waiting for them back at the pick-up point with shaving gear and clean clothes, then the SAS split into two parties and went their separate ways. only meeting up again at Jan Smuts Airport, Johannesburg.  
The SAS rounded off their mission with a few drinks in the airport bar; then it was back home to Rhodesia. It had been an interesting trip and something different Stranger still, it had been the only time they were ever to use their passports to operate in a neighbouring country.
