For more than a year, there was one subject that was guaranteed to raise temperatures at ComOps... and that was the Kazangula ferry, the Zambian-owned civilian craft which operated between Kazangula in Zambia and Botswana. plying the four-nation border point of Zambia/Botswana/Rhodesia and South West Africa (Namibia).
Apart from the railway through Rhodesia. the ferry was Zambia’s only ground link with the south. Not only did it ferry travellers but it was a vital trade link between South Africa and her northern neighbours, carrying much-needed commodities between the south and Zambia. Malawi, Zaire and beyond.
But, was it also being used for more sinister activities?
Was it being used as an instrument by ZIPRA to wage war against Rhodesia? Was it being used to ferry war materials? And was it being used to transport vast numbers of ZIPRA from Zambia to Botswana, thereby affording them easy and unhindered access to the south from where they moved into Rhodesia?
The security forces had been putting pressure on ZIPRA’s usual entry routes across the “horn” of Rhodesia - the north-western reaches of the country - and since then ZIPRA had indeed been using the Kazangula ferry to get from Zambia to Botswana.
Once in the safe haven of Botswana. they had an easy and uninterrupted journey south in ZIPRA trucks before nipping across the long arid international boundary into their support area in Matabeleland.
But the point was, did Zambia and Botswana know about it and condone the use of the _civilian_ ferry to wage a _military_ fight?
Available intelligence led ComOps people to believe Zambia did not want an economic confrontation. Zambia’s president, Kenneth Kaunda knew that should the ferry be used to transport men and arms, the Rhodesians would destroy it. His country and those black states around him could not afford that… and he had apparently refused permission for ZIPRA to use the ferry.
The Botswana Government had no knowledge themselves that the ferry was being used to transport men and materials, although they were put in the picture by the Rhodesians.
The doubts still persisted however, and the Kazangula ferry had become a hotly debated issue at ComOps for many long months. And while the hierarchy thrashed out the problem, the SAS was called in to look at the ferry as a target.
While the ComOps military planners felt that the ferry could be blown off the face of the earth with a couple of rockets from a pair of Hunters which carried no risk to life or limb, the politicians considered that a somewhat _blatant_ act.
If it had to be done, they argued, it had to be done clandestinely, so that no one could prove who did it!
Captain Colin Willis, the “B” Squadron commander, was tasked to work on a feasibility study to destroy the ferry. It was to prove a frustrating experience, for no sooner had he worked out a plan than the mission was postponed.
One idea was to destroy the ferry while it was in Zambia. An eight-man SAS team had infiltrated across the Zambezi under cover of darkness to learn the size and construction, the speed and depth of the river and the number of guards.
Then, as silently as they had entered Zambia, so they slipped back across the small strip of water separating the two countries.
They returned to their base at Victoria Falls to work out a plan. This was that six men would swim to the ferry carrying explosives in submerged motor car tubes.
They would inflate the tubes under the ferry forcing the explosive charges against the craft where they would be secured. A series of time pencils set to detonate in the early hours of the morning would serve as the initiation.
It was a feasible plan, but never to be tried ... for once again the operation was called off and they were recalled to Salisbury.
Colin Willis and his”B” Squadron operators began to think they would never get to grips with the ferry.
But while “B” Squadron were out of the picture, at least for the time being, other security forces were giving the ferry some concentrated attention.
Trackers from one of the independent companies, SAS and Selous Scout callsigns were putting up with many privations in an attempt to build up a case against ZIPRA. For weeks at a time they lurked along the banks of the Zambezi and perched precariously up trees, faithfully recording from their spy nests the makes of vehicles and number plates and the movement of men, until eventually, the evidence began to stack up.
Groups of men, seen talking to Zambian soldiers would run on to the ferry just as it left, while their Zambian friends would monitor the southern bank through their binoculars to make sure they arrived undetected.
Then Rhodesian Special Branch learned that ZIPRA had been secretly transporting landmines and brand new weapons over on the ferry in 200-litre fuel drums. The rifles were sealed in the drums, petrol was poured on the top and a lid put on. in the event of the lid being removed, all that was visible was petrol. Once in Botswana, the fuel drums and their hidden cargoes were buried in the ground outside Francistown.
It was the perfect plan. The only snag was that the Rhodesians found the cache and recovered all the weapons. Worried that the Botswana Government had found their weapons and landmines, ZIPRA changed tactics and transported their weaponry in false bottoms built into a couple of civilian trucks that regularly travelled to and fro on Kazangula ferry.
At the same time, Special Branch was monitoring all the telephone calls between ZIPRA’s Lusaka office and those in Francistown in Botswana. The Lusaka office would give the Francistown representative the code word - which the Rhodesian Special Branch eavesdroppers knew - that they were sending another truck down with a hidden cargo of arms.
Eventually, definite evidence began to trickle in that in addition to the arms that were being shipped, ZIPRA personnel, intelligence agents and hierarchy, were openly using the ferry.
The Rhodesians now had all the proof they needed. Yet for the military planners it was still not a clear-cut matter. They realised only too well that to destroy the ferry would have economic and political effects throughout Africa and the repercussions had to be very carefully weighed up.
Not only would the destruction of this crucial trade link seriously affect black states, but it would also hit friends in the south - the South African exporters and hauliers.
Long and involved discussions followed with the South African authorities, but in the end, the planners decided that all the arguments against destroying the ferry were secondary to dealing with such a very definite ZIPRA threat. Particularly so, at a time when ZIPRA were planning to invade Rhodesia.
Repeated diplomatic representations to both Zambia and Botswana had failed to halt the flow of men and material. The warnings of drastic military action had fallen on deaf ears. Now it was time for action and they must suffer the consequences.
The long on/off operation was finally given the green light. A plan to plant a remote-controlled device on board the offending trucks was seriously considered, then abandoned ... and Colin Willis and his “B” Squadron men were at long last given the mission.
They had now come up with another plan, the brain-child of Captain Pete Fritz.
He suggested that instead of destroying the ferry on the Zambian side, where it carried all the risks of being guarded day and night, they should deal with it while it was on the Botswanan side of the river.
Although there was a Botswana Defence Force presence in the vicinity of the docking area, the ferry itself was not guarded.
Not only that, but the ferry was closer to Rhodesia than the Zambian docking point ... and Botswana was easier to infiltrate than Zambia. The boundary dividing Rhodesia from Botswana was merely an old dilapidated fence, a simple enough hurdle compared to the hazards of canoeing across an open river.
The beauty of the plan, too, was that the op would cause friction between Botswana and Zambia - as well as demonstrate that Rhodesia meant business.
The SAS decided to destroy the ferry with the aid of an RAD. a radio activated device, a mechanism capable of setting off a charge from a distance of up to four kilometres (2.5 miles) on the ground and 15 kilometres (nine miles) from the air. They had been experimenting with a much more sophisticated device than previous RADs and several had been made up especially to suit the needs of special forces.
Territorial officer, Lieutenant Laurie Waiters had helped design the latest RAD in collaboration with colleagues at the civilian company where he worked, and Laurie with his SAS experience had advised what was needed in an operational role.
The device comprised a transmitter/radio unit. which was to remain at the side of the ground commander; and a separate receiver station, which in turn was to be connected up by wires to the actual charge itself.
The charge was to he command-detonated by pressing a button on the ground commander’s transmitter unit; thus the signal setting off the explosion would pass from the transmitter... to the separate receiver station which would be no more than 150 metres from the target ... and then on to an electric detonator set into the charge itself.
The charge was tailor-made to suit the needs of the ferry task. It consisted of a total of 110 kilograms (242 lbs) of explosive, the bulk of it being contained inside a large washing-up bowl. It was boosted with two PVC tubes which had been cut in half, then filled with explosives. Pentolite was used instead of plastic explosives: certainly not an ideal explosive for the military as a bullet could set if off, but easier to get hold of in sanctions-hit Rhodesia. It was a lot cheaper, too, specially as such a vast amount was needed.
The SAS planned that the exact method of the destruction should remain a mystery. After the ferry had blown, a self-destructing mechanism built into the RAD would be activated and the receiver would go up in a puff of smoke - leaving nothing behind to give the game away.
At the end of March, “B” Squadron moved up to Victoria Falls to await the final clearance for the mission.
As always, intelligence was the key to a successful outcome, and a reconnaissance team was sent on a night-time mission to learn the details of the nearby terrain and ensure the ferry only docked in one place.
The final plan called for the washing-up bowl containing the charges to be placed at the end of the concrete slipway in the water, which would be an ideal setting for an explosion. Surrounded by concrete and water, the blast would only have one way to go - straight up through the ferry.
But getting such a vast amount of explosives down to the water’s edge was going to be a problem. Then Pete Fritz came up with another idea.
He suggested that they strap the explosives on to a bicycle. It would be far easier than man-handling them, he argued. Not only that, but bicycle tracks left in that neck of the woods were common and in no way suspicious.
His plan was accepted and a bicycle was specially modified to take the charges.
ComOps finally gave their official blessing and at 20h00 on April 12, a dozen SAS men, led by Pete Fritz, loaded the charges, their machineguns, mortars and the specially-modified bicycle on to two trucks.
Commander Colin Willis wished them well, and they moved off from their base near Victoria Falls on their way to the Rhodesia/Botswana border.
There was a good moon that night and they turned off their lights on the last stretch of their journey. Once over the crest of the final hill, they cut their engines and freewheeled down to the border.
Silently they unloaded their equipment, the washing-up bowl crammed with the charges and the all-important radio-activated device.
Four men were to remain with the vehicles to man the machineguns and mortars and provide protection for the other operators if things turned nasty.
The others helped Corporal _Mitch_ strap the explosives on to the bicycle. Cautiously he set off pushing his precious and sensitive cargo on its journey down towards the water’s edge, while the others carried the ancillary equipment.
Their travels that night were taking them virtually along the border fence itself. The road was a raised embankment which ran through a marshy floodplain. As they carefully picked their way along in the moonlight, game fed near the embankment undisturbed by the silent, shadowy figures.
It was a peacefully calm night in Southern Africa. The animals quietly munched the vegetation. And the bicycle slowly rolled on its way ...
Suddenly, the tranquility was broken by a deafening roar that stopped the soldiers dead in their tracks. For a moment the commotion had them mystified.
Then, thundering across the marsh came a stampeding herd of buffaloes. The soldiers watched in amazement as hundreds crashed on their way, splashing and clattering like a great tornado and leaving a flattened trail in their wake.
The din very soon became a muffled noise in the distance: then the herd was gone ...
For a few moments the SAS didn’t dare move. Would the noise alert the Botswana Defence Force men, thought to be on the other side of the border fence and a mere 200 metres away’?
But there was no reaction: no one came to investigate, and they realised that such an event was probably a common occurrence. They breathed easy again and continued on their way uneventfully, soon arriving at a spot in the treeline next to the border fence.
There was not one Botswanan to be seen and Lieutenant Laurie Waiters and Corporal Ron Bracchi stepped unnoticed through the fence separating the two countries. They began to search for a good vantage point to set up the command post from where the blast would be detonated with the transmitter/radio. They looked at every available angle and eventually settled on a suitable spot about 130 metres back from the slipway and some six metres from the fence on the Rhodesian side of the border.
They could not have found a better position. Standing, they would be able to see the ferry as it made its way over the Zambezi from the Zambian docking area. Sitting, a clump of bushes would provide reasonable cover.
Lieutenant Waiters and his team of two corporals set up the radio/transmitter unit and put up a small aerial at their command post.
it was now Captain Pete Fritz’s turn to cross the border and he led the rest of the party down to the slipway.
Three men kept a look-out while Lieutenant Mike Rich and Corporal _Mitch_ removed the explosives from the bicycle and carefully carried them into the water. Then, ever-so-gingerly, they lowered the massive charge, complete with its washing up bowl, in the middle of the ferry slipway.
They took the wires to an anthill twenty metres from the slipway and hid the receiver station among the reeds, but above the water.
They radioed back to the command station, then with Lieutenant Laurie Waiters operating his transmitter, they carried out three trials to make sure the RAD was working properly. Each time a small light came on at the receiver station hidden among the reeds.
The circuit was working: there was no need to worry.
The wires were connected, the lid of the camouflage-painted box housing the receiver was put in place and further camouflaged with leaves to add to the deception.
Then the demolition team returned across the border fence to Rhodesia, taking the bicycle with them. Captain Fritz stayed with the small team of men in the command post... and the others returned to the protection party who fortunately had not been needed after all, and they all moved back a safe distance to the crest of the hill.
Finally, Friday 13th arrived bright and clear. Up in Lusaka the “C” Squadron operators had already smashed Nkomo’s personal command post, flattened the Liberation Centre and shattered ZIPRA morale. Maybe the “B” Squadron men would be able to round off the SAS’s run of military successes against ZIPRA that Easter weekend?
Excitement was mounting in the command post down at the border, each man longing for the time when the target would cross over to Botswana.
Although they couldn’t see the ferry from their hiding place among the bushes, the sounds of shouting, banging and clinking of spanners coming from the Zambian bank indicated that all was not well with the pontoon.
If only it could be fixed for just one last trip across the Zambezi.
At about 07h00, the first vehicles began arriving at the Botswana docking area.
At Spray View private airfield at Victoria Falls, meanwhile, the SAS squadron commander was climbing aboard a Lynx. Colin Willis and the pilot were to orbit north of the ferry in Zambian airspace. By Colin’s side was a transmitter/radio unit similar to the one being used by the ground troops. In the unlikely event of something going wrong down at the command post. Colin would still be able to activate the charges with his back-up transmitter.
Meanwhile, the queue of cars on the Botswanan side of the river was growing longer. The ferry had still not been fixed and the motorists were growing impatient.
One businessman in a hurry to get over to Zambia was bribing his way up to the front of the queue. Watching the transactions from the cover of the bushes, the SAS saw him pass banknotes to some of the truck drivers, and they followed his progress as he gradually edged his way nearer to the slipway.
But there was still no sign of the ferry.
Finally at 10h00, two hours behind schedule, the ferry’s engines started up. The Rhodesian soldiers and the impatient drivers breathed a sigh of relief, although for very different reasons.
In the bushes by the international boundary separating Rhodesia from Botswana, the tension was mounting as the ferry came into view. It was carrying two vehicles, one a jeep with a white family of three children and their parents.
The SAS’s orders had been to destroy the ferry with the minimum loss of life. But as the ferry moved closer to the docking site, the queue of cars and trucks began edging towards the slipway. The SAS realised that if they did not press their fire button at precisely the right moment, the impatient Botswanan drivers and their passengers would be on the pontoon as soon as the Zambian vehicles were off.
The ferry pulled alongside. The truck with the children in got clear of the 110 kilograms of pentolite hidden beneath them. Immediately, the column of impatient drivers who had been despairing of ever getting to Zambia that day, began moving forwards.
“_Fire!_” Pete Fritz ordered.
Lieutenant Waiters switched to the correct channel and pressed the firing button.
There was a momentary delay while the signal passed from the transmitter by his side to the receiver station hidden among the reeds near the slipway.
“_Fire!_” repeated an anxious Pete Fritz urgently, during the delay, concerned about the danger to the motorists ... but the message was already on its way.
As the explosion went off with devastating effect and the earth trembled, an SAS corporal had his camera at the ready to record the severing of the vital ZIPRA infiltration route.
Steel, concrete and water shot into the air as the massive explosion tore the ferry completely in half, spraying enormous chunks of debris in all directions. A piece of plate screamed over the heads of the detonation party... and back up the crest of the hill the rest of the “’B’” Squadron operators saw a jet of water shoot 150 metres into the air.
One half of the ferry was blown right out of the water and landed on the bank. The rear half of the ferry remained afloat for a while before settling into a muddy, oily patch at the slipway. Everywhere there was pandemonium.
Animals were stampeding all over the place. People were screaming. Metal rained from the skies and as it clattered down, the long queue of drivers, waiting for so long to get on the ferry, suddenly thought better of the idea and roared off back down the road.
In the bushes, on the Rhodesian side of the border, Lieutenant Laurie Waiters turned his transmitter switch to another channel and pressed the firing button.
Out among the reeds near the torn-apart slipway, there was a secondary explosion as the receiver station self-destructed, blowing all evidence of how the ferry had been sabotaged. No one heard it, except the SAS who had been expecting the explosion and were able to isolate the sounds. Everyone else was far too interested in getting away. Besides, their ears were still ringing from the initial blast.
Quickly the “B’” Squadron men dismantled their aerial, gathered up their belongings and headed back up the hill to rejoin the rest of their party.
ZIPRA’s tactic of sneaking their men and materials across into Botswana for a trouble-free journey to Rhodesia had been blown sky high. They were left with no other option but to travel across “the horn” of Rhodesia, a hazardous route dotted with Rhodesian security forces ever-eager to take them on.
As predicted, both Botswana and Zambia blamed each other for not properly looking after the ferry. Zambia blamed Botswana for allowing the Rhodesians to destroy the ferry in Botswana. Botswana countered and accused Zambia of allowing a spy to place a bomb on the ferry while it had been over in Zambian waters.
Zambia thereafter promised that the ferry would be used only for commercial purposes. But the Rhodesians did not believe them and ComOps made it clear they would blow up any replacement pontoon.
￼
Following hard on the heels of the successful Lusaka ground attacks as it did, it had been a bad day for ZIPRA and the countries that aided and succoured them.
Yet in one of those strange twists of fate, it had also been a black day for others not so far from home. For not only did the ferry provide ZIPRA with a vital link to and from Zambia and Botswana, but it was also crucial to the Seious Scouts clandestine operations into Zambia.
By mid-1978, it had become essential for the security forces to establish some form of transport movement through Botswana and Zambia to combat ZIPRA... to set up a route into Zambia... establish a spy network... collect intelligence and to be able to “’snatch” people for information.
Bulawayo SB had at that time virtually no links with Botswana, no sources in Francistown, and no ready access into Botswana anywhere along the border. They complained bitterly that the Selous Scouts had ruined their whole network by an abortive raid into Francistown.
Special Branch officer Keith Samler, co-ordinating the Scouts operations in Matabeleland at the time, discussed the matter of re-establishing the link with Botswana, but Bulawayo SB were terribly indignant that he should suggest being able to do something which, firstly, had been ruined by the Scouts, and secondly, that he should be able to do what they had failed at. There was much bitter debate.
Keith approached the Selous Scouts commander, Ron Reid-Daly, with the scheme and the CO was very enthusiastic and offered men and total support.
Both of the men provided by Reid-Daly - one a territorial member and the other an ex-SAS man - went on heavy duty vehicle driving courses. Keith Samler arranged the ex-SAS man a job with a trucking company and his first assignment was a round trip to Malawi and back. He experienced no real problems except for a beating at the hands of the Zambian Army, but it was par for the course for any new white driver on the run. An African heavy vehicle driver was also recruited.
One of the Scouts involved in the transport scheme - it relied on the Kazangula ferry - made many visits to the Botswanan capital, setting up shop, bribing government officials and making well-placed contacts. He rented a flat and became part of the scenery.
His spying activities were productive and one of his drinking friends was a somewhat talkative member of the ZIPRA hierarchy... Elliot Sibanda, _The Black Swine_.
The transport and Botswana spying link became operative at the end of 1978, and by the time the SAS began to turn their attention to the Kazangula ferry for the last time, the system was in full swing and some good intelligence was coming back from all three undercover operatives.
Then the SAS, following orders from ComOps, blew up the ferry - and with it the Scouts carefully planned transport and intelligence gathering operations.
Keith Samler and other members of the team were incredulous that such a thing should have happened and it gave them several headaches.
One Selous Scout and the African undercover driver were held up on the Zambian side of the border for days and in the end, the African was forced to swim the Zambezi above Victoria Falls to give SB some hot intelligence gleaned on his latest trip north.
The other white Selous Scout agent was beaten up and several situations cropped up exposing everybody involved to unnecessary danger.
There were some angry men around that Easter weekend... and they were not all ZIPRA either. The destruction of the Kazangula ferry was to remain a hotly debated issue in some quarters just as it had before the SAS sent it on its final journey.
