By now, the joint SAS/MNR callsign was working exceptionally well. Together, the two forces had notched up a string of successes and SAS officer Lieutenant Andrew Sanders, who had commanded numerous combined operations, was most enthusiastic about the rebels’ role in Mozambique.  
What FRELIMO thought of such team work is not known, but the cost to FRELIMO of such a liaison was becoming astronomical. The increasing numbers of blasts rocking the country were being taken very seriously and FRELIMO had been forced to re-introduce the death penalty for treason, sabotage and terrorism.  
Yet, hated and harassed though they were by FRELIMO, the rebels’ popularity with civilians was continuing to grow and had a great deal to do with many of their successes.  
In September, that popularity was again put to the test when a 32-strong combined SAS/MNR group arrived a few kilometres from the towering Xilvuo Mountain where their latest target lay. Their deployment had been from Lake Alexander, an isolated spot a few kilometres from the Mozambican border, especially chosen to cover the SAS’s involvement with the MNR. It had taken the Bells two lifts to get all 32 heavily-laden operators to their LZ deep inside Mozambique.  
It took a further two days of hard marching for the group to reach the target area 165 kilometres (102 miles) inside Mozambique.  
At the top of the mountain was one of FRELIMO’s vitally important tropospheric scatter stations - a highly-sophisticated radio transmission and telecommunications centre. The Monte Xilvuo station was part of a communications chain linking major FRELIMO bases around the country - the key between FRELIMO in the north, south and central areas of Mozambique.  
Cutting that chain would not only seriously disrupt FRELIMO communications, it would also force them to switch from using the tropospheric scatter communications which were difficuit to monitor, to a system which was far easier for the Rhodesians to intercept.  
Such was the importance of the centre that it was well-fortified, and there were reports that the platoon of protecting troops quartered in a three-storey barrack block had the benefit of anti-aircraft guns. Not only that, but the troops also had the ability to call in the tanks from the FRELIMO base at Dondo, five kilometres away.  
But having arrived just short of the mountain, on the main road leading to Beira, the SAS and MNR could go no further.  
There were civilians ahead and a few kilometres further on stretched the Pungwe River which twisted and turned on its way down to the Indian Ocean. And where there was water, there were bound to be locals who could report them to FRELIMO.  
The SAS/MNR were deep inside Mozambique, were without immediate air support, and had no wish to tangle with tanks. It was time for the men of the Mozambique National Resistance to come into their own.  
Leaving the SAS in the cover of the bush, they walked off into the nearby villages to liaise with the civilians and were able to persuade a couple of men to escort their party through the civilian population, across the river, and guide them to the foot of the mountains.  
But for the MNR and their good relations with the locals, the SAS doubted if they would have reached the target that night, if at all. For the bush was extremely thick and there was only one crossing point over the river.  
By last light, the 32 men had eased their way through the population, negotiated the river, and were at the bottom of the mountain.  
Then, they began their long hard climb to the top, an agonising journey, made worse by their packs, which even by SAS standards were extremely heavy.  
Five hours later and a good three-quarters of the way to the top, they hit the tar road which wound on its way to the _Troposcatter_. It was already midnight and time was against them.  
A reconnaissance party reported that the _Troposcatrer_ was surrounded by a security fence and there was a sentry on duty at a guard hut, although he was fast asleep.  
Time was now the enemy and they decided against taking a devious route in favour of sticking to the road - then walking in through the front gate!  
The entrance was locked, but good old _Freddie_ FRELIMO had done them a favour and lost the key - and the gate was wired up with the padlock still in position. Now all they had to do was cut the wire holding the gate in place and tiptoe past the snoring guard.  
No one saw them nip through the entrance and ease around the back of the target where they cut a hole in the fence for their escape down the mountain.  
The commander had picked up a number of twin-barrelled 23 millimetre antiaircraft guns with his night binoculars, and, getting the operators to sit outside the fence, he, the mission 21C Dave Berry and a couple of others silently moved around the target assessing which of the weapons could pose a problem for them.  
There was certainly an impressive amount of firepower protecting the _Troposcaner_, but only one of the four 23 millimetre guns was in a position to give them any serious trouble. It was near their escape route and Dave Berry was given the job of destroying it.  
They gathered up the other men, then quickly led them into position around the telecommunications centre.  
Dave Berry and his RPD gunner moved up to the 23 millimetre gun, which was nicely sandbagged, and no doubt protected a couple of sleeping gunners. Two other men were to take on another gun position where the gunners were tucked up asleep under a bivvy.  
The commander was to launch the attack by throwing a bunker bomb into the control room. That would be the signal for the men to open up on their specific targets.  
Soon, everyone was in position and only FRELIMO was unaware of the trouble that was about to erupt.  
Suddenly, the silence was shattered and all hell broke loose as the main group’s bunker bomb exploded in the control room.  
Within seconds, the roar of rapid shooting had added to the commotion of the attack. Fires were burning, smoke was billowing and a vivid display of streaming tracer lit the early morning.  
Then the RPG-7 gunners were on their feet. There were a couple of huge bangs and flashes, and the first of their rockets left their launchers to punch holes into the various communications positions.  
The minute the signal came and the firing started, Dave Berry threw a bunker bomb into the gun pit, then ran for cover. But nothing happened, and he ran forward to try again, this time with a white phosphorus grenade.  
As he closed in on the gun position, he saw a sleepy gunner clamber out from behind the sandbags and climb on to the seat of his gun.  
Dave pulled the pin on the grenade and threw it towards the gunner. The canister arched through the air towards the gun pit but even before it hit home, Dave had accounted for the gunner with his AK. As the grenade exploded and white smoke billowed out of the pit, the gunner, who by now lay slumped over the seat, was thrown forward on to the barrel.  
Dave Berry’s RPD gunner immediately offloaded his belt into both man and gun and Dave finished off the remainder of his magazine on the FRELIMO man. By now, the grenade had set the sandbags alight and a fire was raging in the gunpit.  
Over in the other gun position, another bunker bomb had also failed to go off. As the two SAS men responsible ran for cover, the FRELIMO gunners opened up, hitting one man in the head and the other in the foot.  
The SAS returned fire and all fell silent in the gun pit. The two SAS men examined their wounds, but fortunately they were not serious.  
For the next ten minutes, the SAS and the MNR kept up the attack, pouting a fierce amount of firepower into the targets. And despite all the din, the FRELIMO in their three-storey barrack block, kept their doors tightly bolted.  
But now the attackers were rapidly losing the fight against time. They had to be on their way and off the mountain before first light and before reaction troops and the tanks could be deployed.  
The damage to the _Troposcatter_ was far from complete but it was enough to upset FRELIMO and would cost them the equivalent often thousand Rhodesian dollars to repair.  
The commander shouted the ceasefire and the operators gathered their equipment and deftly withdrew around the side of the destroyed control room and past the still burning gun pit.  
They consolidated, then stepped through the escape hole in the security fence and out into the thick bush once more, setting off down the mountainside as fast as they could. But the bush was extremely thick and the going hard; and they couldn’t see a thing. The only way was to slide down the mountain, continually saying where they were for the benefit of the men behind.  
Above them, the telecommunications centre crackled and burned. Now that the commotion had died down, FRELIMO were venturing out of their barracks and beginning to get themselves organised.  
The attackers had been battling through the bush for about an hour when a loud explosion rocked the mountainside… and Dave Berry knew that the fire he had started in the gunpit had finally spread to his unexploded bunker bomb.  
By now, FRELIMO were firing down the mountainside with everything they had. But they didn’t know where the troublemakers were and their searching fire was going all over the mountain. Streams of tracers flew through the darkness over the attackers’ heads, to be followed by the explosions as the 23 millimetre shells went off.  
It was an impressive and fascinating sight against the blackness of the night. But it was pretty terrifying, too, and it gave the saboteurs plenty of incentive to get moving.  
Suddenly, they were out of the undergrowth and at the bottom in a small clearing, hitting the tar road at about 04h00. It would be daylight soon and they knew they had to be out of the area and across the main Beira road by then. Only then could they feel safe and relax.  
They decided to stick to the road in the hope of gaining a few vital minutes. It was something they wouldn’t normally do as they had no idea if FRELIMO were waiting in ambush at the bottom of the road.  
But time was now totally against them and the pressure very much on.  
They raced down the tar and could hear the rumble of vehicles crunching along the main Beira road. Was it military transport bearing FRELIMO reaction troops? Would they be cut off almost 200 kilometres (125 miles) inside hostile territory with no means of transport except their feet?  
They hurried down the mountain, hoping against hope that it was just civilian traffic after all.  
The 23 millimetre shells continued to search for the elusive attackers, now nearing the flatlands close to the road.  
Suddenly, a very loud voice rang out across the night and challenged them in Portuguese.  
“HOLTA!’” its owner ordered from the bush just 25 metres away, uncertain if the shadowy shapes clattering down the mountainside were friends or foes.  
Then, without waiting for a reply, the FRELIMO group waiting in ambush near the bottom of the mountain opened up with small arms fire and a 12,7 millimetre machinegun mounted on a vehicle.  
The SAS and MNR fled for their lives, leaping over small rises and running blindly to the fight- while yet another group ran up an embankment to the left.  
The volume of fire that came down was tremendous and the SAS were big enough to admit that it was all fairly frightening.  
Then Dave Berry on the fight of the road crashed to his knees and his Bergen pinned his head to the ground. He staggered to his feet and took off again, finishing his journey with a record-breaking long jump, landing in a shallow riverbed on top of 13 other lads who had already beaten him to it.  
A tremendous feeling of relief swept over him. But where the hell was the commander and all the others?  
The first thing he did was check that they had the _Big Means_ with them. They did, and again he experienced an overwhelming sense of relief. At least now they could communicate with the outside world.  
They lay low for 15 minutes with FRELIMO keeping up their barrage. Dave tried to make radio contact with the mission commander and the others, but there was no reply. He shouted to them but couldn’t make himself heard above the roar of FRELIMO guns, and knew that even if they shouted back, he wouldn’t be able to hear them anyway.  
Those who had run to the left of the road were pinned down between the FRELIMO ambush group at the bottom of the mountain and the reaction team firing from the top. Soon the ambushers dispersed and the trapped men darted across the mountain road to join the main SAS/MNR group to the right.  
Five men crossed over and three went for cover near each other. When Bob Jones, Paul Schofield and an MNR man saw each other, they thought they were part of the main group, but when they looked around, they realised their little party was completely alone.  
Everyone else had gone. Where to, they hadn’t a clue. They called out a few times, but there was no reply.  
The three men decided to cross the main Beira road at the foot of the mountain as soon as possible and get into open country, for they knew that to be caught on the wrong side of the road would be disastrous. They had to get a move on before a reaction force could follow up with tanks.  
￼  
The other SAS/MNR groups meanwhile were still lying low at the bottom of the mountain with angry FRELIMO still firing at them.  
Then, as if in answer to their prayers, a funny thing happened.  
FRELIMO at the top of the mountain opened up on the FRELIMO ambush group at the bottom… and the ambushers began firing back at their own men up the mountain. A real ding-dong battle raged between both FRELIMO groups, and for a few moments, the focus was taken off the SAS and MNR.  
But now the sun was coming up and Dave Berry’s 14-man group knew they had to get going. They gathered up their packs and quickly moved off the mountain, walking under the high canopy of tracers and smallarms rounds coming from both ends of the mountain and arching high above them.  
As they neared the Beira road, they were very apprehensive, remembering all the traffic they had heard earlier. They managed to cross over uneventfully, but almost immediately heard the sound of tanks approaching.  
It was yet another incentive to get going and they quickened their pace. Once back at the river, they refilled their water bottles, for they had no way of knowing how long they would have to stay in the area before recovery.  
They were all dog-tired by now, but there could be no relaxing; they set off once more, with the pace as fast as before.  
It was now almost 05h00 and fairly light.  
As Dave Berry and his 13 SAS and MNR men approached an African kraal they could see people lying outside their huts. But the Africans kept their heads down and pretended they were asleep ... and the column of men snaked around the prostrate figures uneventfully and continued on their way.  
Eventually, they got well clear of the civilian population and reached their crash rendezvous. But there was still no sign of the 18 missing men.  
They lost no time in rigging up their radio to tell the officer co-ordinating the operation back in Rhodesia what had happened… and he immediately got airborne with an instruction to the Lynx pilot to gel across the border as quickly as possible.  
The Hunters had been put on standby, too, which was always a comforting thought to ground troops in a spot of bother. The choppers were involved in another pick-up, but would be with them soon.  
Two hours later, the Lynx arrived overhead and as soon as the airborne commander began talking to Dave Berry over the radio, mission commander Andrew Sanders came on the air. It was the first time Dave Berry had heard from the commander since the ambush, and the good news was that he and another group were only two kilometres away from them.  
A roll call accounted for everyone bar one MNR man and two SAS troopies, Bob Jones and Paul Schofield. There was no way of knowing either, if the three missing men had stayed together or if each was running around Mozambique on his own.  
There was now very heavy vehicle movement in the area and the general feeling was that if the three men had not been killed, they would almost certainly have been captured ... and if so, they were as good as dead anyway.  
But Dave Berry and his party had their own worries. They were caught in a triangle of roads. They could hear FRELIMO military vehicles and tanks deploying on all sides, and dropping troops to cut them off.  
Dave called for immediate jet support and the Hunters were soon with them, dropping off their deadly payloads. Then, as the jets’ time overhead ran out, they returned to base.  
Eventually, the helicopters could be heard coming to take the first load of men to safety. Unfortunately for those left behind to await the second lift, the Lynx, which could have given support if need be, had returned to Rhodesia to refuel - while all around their triangle of roads were enemy tanks and troops.  
They had no idea how many FRELIMO tanks had been neutralised by the Hunters and the atmosphere was electric as they sat with their rifles ready waiting for FRELIMO to flush them out of their bush hideaway.  
But FRELIMO never came, and the SAS and MNR neither knew nor cared why. After a worrying ninety minutes without air cover, the Lynx appeared overhead again and shortly afterwards, the Bells arrived to take them home.  
Even before the choppers had touched down, the operators had thrown in their kit. The Bells struggled up but at fifty feet, could go no higher. Dave Berry threw a couple of Bergens out and the choppers lifted. The operators had quite a bit of adrenalin to replace that night and readily admit to consuming large quantities of vodka.  
But the fate of the two SAS troopies, Bob Jones and Paul Schofield, plus the MNR man, was still unknown.  
The two troopies had only six months’ operational experience behind them and were still very much new boys by SAS standards. If they had not already been killed or captured, would they know what to do? The longer they were on their own, the bigger the odds against them, and some of the older hands, now safely back in Rhodesia, feared the worst.  
￼  
The three missing men, however, were still very much alive. Having crossed the Beira road, they realised that a reaction force would probably be deployed to both their north and south. Forcing themselves to think clearly, they reckoned they had only one day to attract the attention of the choppers or spotter planes. After that they would be caught between both reaction forces.  
Their position was critical. They were deep inside hostile territory, had just contributed to an attack on a vital FRELIMO telecommunications centre, and were not the most welcome characters. They had no communications to call for help, and water would not be easy to come by.  
As they began to walk northwards away from the road, tanks began arriving and there was a lot of movement on the road.  
Then one tank closed on the three men and they ran for their lives. But after two minutes it broke off its advance and the little party slowed to a brisk walk. their hearts pumping the adrenalin flow easing slightly as the pressure lessened.  
They walked until dawn then crossed a river. The water was a godsend: they needed it badly for the long walk ahead of them.  
They had decided the best plan was either to head north and walk 100 kilometres (62 miles) to the MNR’s Gorongoza mountain base where they could call for help, or head west to the eastern highlands and home. The second plan meant a trek ofalmost 200 kilometres (124 miles). Both alternatives were daunting,.  
They had little food left and although they replenished their water, they knew it would have to be conserved until they reached the next river source, sixty kilometres (37 miles) to the north.  
They were by now feeling the first effects of fatigue and felt physically drained. By early morning, they had walked about twelve kilometres (seven miles) away from the target, walking due north and using their standard issue wrist compasses for their bearings.  
Then, to their utter relief, came the welcoming whirr of rotor blades and a few moments later, a Rhodesian chopper appeared in the skies.  
But their green smoke grenades and phosphorus failed to attract the pilot’s attention, and the trio felt only frustration as the chopper, which represented life itself to them, flew off, and the bush fell silent once again.  
The whirr of the rotors generally meant uplift and it was the most loved sound by any operational soldier. But this time the rules had changed and the sight and sound of the choppers seemed only there to tantalise.  
If the two SAS men were worried, it was nothing to that of the MNR operator. For he knew no mercy would be shown to him if caught by FRELIMO. He would be beheaded.  
They were now between two major roads and could see FRELIMO sweeplines... and they wondered who or what would arrive first - the _Freds_ or the choppers. They knew they had to move to survive.  
Another chopper came in but again the pilot failed to see them. Then another put down 400 metres away from them to refuel from its inner drums. They were saved at last!  
The three stranded men ran towards the waiting chopper, but the going was hard through the thick grass. They could see the Bell sitting waiting for them, but they got to within eighty metres when it slowly lifted, banked to the north and then was gone.  
A feeling of despair set in, and, as they set off to find some open ground so they could be seen by the choppers, morale was low.  
Now, they forced themselves to think like the _Freds_. What would they do? What would they use? The three men acknowledged FRELIMO were capable of very fast and thorough follow-up.  
From their position atop Monte Xilvuo, FRELIMO would be in an ideal spot to see all the open spaces and helicopter movement. Then the three men began to think of the smoke and phosphorus they had thrown and if the _Freds_ had seen it.  
Now they realised they were in a no-win situation. They wanted to attract attention to themselves, but certainly not FRELIMO attention.  
They moved off again, slowly this time, taking more care over their antitracking techniques.  
Eventually, they found an ideal spot and decided to lay low and wait for an aircraft rather than walk to Gorongoza or home. They had to give the pilots a sporting chance of finding them.  
Tiredness swept over them and they wondered if they would have the energy to move away if a FRELIMO sweepline came. But they knew their minds would carry their bodies through bad times, and they would move if they had to. It was something they had learned on their selection, but had only fully appreciated once with the troops.  
The MNR operator began his customary afternoon prayer session and made a small offering of powder on the ground to appease the spirits. It did nothing to soothe SAS nerves.  
Soon after 13h00, two Lynx aircraft came overhead, traversing the area for about twenty minutes and coming close to their position. Having used all their smoke grenades, they desperately began signalling their position with their heliograph.  
But again they were not seen. Then they lit a fire. But still no reaction. Eventually the Lynx, by now low on fuel, disappeared from sight.  
The three men were desperately disappointed. Their means of escape had been so close - and yet so far.  
At 15h00, the Lynx was back again and the three men felt it was probably their last chance of recovery. After that they would be on their own and they would have to begin walking to get clear of the area.  
For twenty frustrating minutes, their heliograph and fire gave out their urgent calls for help, but to no avail.  
Suddenly, the Lynx’s wings tipped left, then right. They had been seen and they knew that a chopper would be with them soon. The three men were ecstatic.  
What happened next, they found out later. The Lynx pilot lost them, and with the chopper on its way for recovery, the Lynx pilot and passenger still could not see them and were close to calling the Bell away. For by now there was no one for them to uplift.  
Then the passenger, Sergeant Major Karl Lutz, picked up their fire and registered their heliograph ... and the helicopter pilot came in with the usual Rhodesian Air Force precision. The LZ was only just big enough for the Bell to hover above them at six feet.  
The three men scrambled up into the chopper, climbed out of the LZ and headed home.  
There was no energy left for a celebration and the three men slept soundly that night. It had been a worrying experience - and FRELIMO would not be the only ones to remember their visit to the Mozambican mountain!  
