Within six months of their daring and highly successful attack on the fuel depot, the MNR and SAS were planning to slip back into Beira again. This time, their visit was to take them right into the heart of the FRELIMO stronghold, not merely the fringes.  
It would call for a certain amount of bravado, but at that stage of the war, that was one quality the operators did not lack.  
Top of their hit list this time was FRELIMO’s stategically important telephone exchange, the main telecommunications link between FRELIMO’s major operational areas in central Mozambique and FRELIMO’s command centre in Maputo, the capital.  
Entry to the telecommunications complex was to be as surreptitious as possible, not only to ensure they achieved their aim, but so that they still had the element of surprise on their side to take on another target.  
Although there was a guard on duty at the front of the telecommunications complex, intelligence said he generally hung around the steps of the post office and even slept some of the time. The SAS/MNR team would have to get into the building without alerting him or waking the two Cuban telecommunications experts who slept in the centre.  
Their entry was to be through the metal gates at the back of the centre but as there would be no time to pick the lock holding the padlock and chain in place, they would have to use bolt-cutters.  
The operators would slip through, piece the chain together with a length of wire, then with Pete Cole and Les Clark picking the inside locks, make their way to the most important rooms housing equipment which, if destroyed, would cause the most damage to the FRELIMO telecommunications network.  
They knew exactly which equipment to lay their time-delayed charges around, having gleaned their knowledge from advanced demolition courses over the years. A recent visit to Salisbury’s telecommunications centre on the pretext of doing another demolition course had also enabled them to update their knowledge.  
Their charges, set to go off during the exfiltration phase, would partially demolish the building. The most important rooms were on the first floor and once destroyed, the floors above would collapse like a pack of cards. The SAS and MNR planned to leave enough thermite and fire bombs around to reduce what was left of the building to a pile of ashes.  
After setting their time delays, they were to turn their attention to the prison on the opposite side of the road, where hundreds of political prisoners were kept in appalling almost Dickensian, conditions.  
According to some of the horror stories coming out of Beira, the prisoners would stick their arms through metal bars and plead with passers-by for help. The MNR and SAS now planned to answer the prisoners’ cries for help and they were to attack the prison, eliminate the guards and release the prisoners, just as the remarkable Andre Matangaidze, the MNR leader, had done at Gorongoza the year before.  
While the main party, commanded by Captain Colin Willis, was doing that, two other groups would be lurking around the docks intent on doing more damage, for the other major targets earmarked for destruction were two dredgers, the _Matola_ and the _Pungoe_ and the drydocks.  
If all went according to plan and the dredgers were put out of the action, the harbour would silt up very rapidly preventing large shipping getting into Beira. This would greatly aid Rhodesia’s war effort by preventing Russian resupply ships bringing ZANLA munitions and arms into the harbour… while the destruction of the drydocks would further hamper the use of Beira as an economically viable port by anyone wanting to bring ships in for repair.  
Having missed the chance of attacking one of ZANLA’s warehouses on their first trip to Beira, they hoped to be more successful the second time around. This time, a ZANLA warehouse right on the dockside was to get a visit from a group of demolition experts.  
The mission was planned for late one Sunday night in September when the docks and the city were reported to be as quiet as a grave. The few FRELIMO who did patrol the city did so in small groups, and were armed with AKs and just a few rounds.  
But Sunday night came and went and the hand-picked SAS and MNR men were still on their way to Beira. The infiltration phase had been a lot harder than they had anticipated and it was Monday night by the time the black shapes of the Beira skyline loomed into sight.  
The feeling was that Monday was as dead as Sunday and the various commanders decided that the mission should go ahead.  
The original plan too was that they sneak into Beira after 23h00, but Colin Willis and the ten operators in the main party arrived on the outskirts of the city much earlier and a decision was made to get into town without delay, destroy the telephone exchange, storm the prison and release the prisoners. The two other groups meanwhile, were to get on with their tasks and set up their charges on FRELIMO’s precious dredgers and drydocks, and around ZANLA’s warehouse.  
Two men were left behind in the mangrove swamps to watch their route out. and on Colin’s signal, the other eight operators came out of the black mud and the slime of the mangrove swamps, changed into clean, crisp FRELIMO uniforms and began moving down the streets of Beira, bold as brass and looking for all the world like a FRELIMO patrol about its business.  
Most sported the usual array of communist weapons and their side pockets concealed holsters containing silenced pistols, in case they had to extract themselves from a situation quickly and quietly.  
Colin and Lieutenant Mike Rich had silenced American AR40 rifles, which had the ability to fire at an extremely rapid rate. They were to take on any FRELIMO men who looked like raising the alarm, swiftly pumping them with dozens of rounds to ensure their permanent silence.  
They felt very conspicuous and a little apprehensive. Yet each man was quietly confident that he was with a highly trained and capable team.  
As they made their way down the city streets, they constantly reminded themselves to act naturally and walk casually. But their nerves were taut and many felt that their bodies must have looked the same. Although they were well blackened-up, the SAS men in the party were very conscious that their European features would not pass close inspection.  
They kept their heads slightly lowered and hugged the shadows, but every pair of eyes was on the look-out for trouble and every finger was curled around a trigger.  
Now and then, the odd pedestrian passed within a few paces of them and the soldiers felt as if they were on the stage with every Mozambican eye riveted on them. But none of the passers-by even bothered to give them a second glance, and the saboteurs knew they were doing well.  
They turned into a main street and headed straight towards the city centre.  
The scene that confronted them was not at all conducive to steady heartbeat.  
The quiet grave-like atmosphere they had been expecting had given way to a veritable hub of activity and the thought flashed through one man’s mind that it resembled Salisbury’s main thoroughfare, Jameson Avenue, on a Saturday morning.  
The city was well lit and there were people strolling about and waiting for buses. Other groups were gathered on the street corners, idly chatting and passing the night away.  
The restaurants and pavement cafes were still open and business appeared to be booming as the late-night customers crowded around the metal tables, smoking and leisurely sipping at their bottomless coffee cups.  
Cars rolled on their way and occasionally, buses swung around corners at breakneck speed, their impatient hooters blaring out their urgent warnings and adding to the city sounds.  
It was blatantly obvious that even though the Portuguese had left, their lifestyle for a late-night social life had lingered on.  
And there in the thick of it all were eight MNR and SAS operators with sabotage clearly in mind. Undaunted by the unexpected turn of events and the increased risk of compromise, the MNR/SAS team continued to brave it out, snaking their way around pedestrians and crossing streets, just as a normal FRELIMO patrol would do.  
None of the Mozambicans suspected a thing as the soldiers marched on their way, silently ticking off the various landmarks en route to the telephone exchange.  
Yet Colin Willis, concerned though he was by all the people milling around, was still confident that as long as they could continue the bluff, they could achieve the mission.  
Then, 300 metres from the target, the commander suddenly saw a FRELIMO guard at about the same time that he saw them.  
He had been slovenly lounging in the shadows against a building, but the moment he saw Colin and his team, he leapt to attention and started gathering civilians around him checking their passes. It was obvious he was convinced the uniformed men bearing down on him was some sort of high-ranking FRELIMO party.  
He nervously allowed them to ease past him unopposed and they rounded the last corner without him guessing their true identity. They offered up a silent prayer and continued on their way.  
But their relief was very short-lived. If they had been taken aback by the sight ofso many people around the city centre that night, it was nothing to the consternation they felt when they caught their first glimpse of the target  
Instead of the one guard they were expecting to find on duty at the telecommunications centre, there were nearer ten heavily armed FRELIMO patrolling the building.  
To further complicate matters, there was a bus stop near the back gate where they planned to cut their entry - and there were dozens of people milling around the gate and lounging in the shadows waiting for their transport home.  
Colin needed time to think things over carefully. There could be no panic decisions, no hasty actions.  
Quickly, he led the way across the road, then nipped down a dark alley where they would not be silhouetted by the street lights.  
Then they based up in the grounds of a partially constructed building while Colin took stock of the situation and contemplated what to do for the best.  
The odds against success were stacking up rapidly, but there was no cause for despair yet. The mission was still possible. But the commander realised there was not the slightest chance of them pulling the job off while so many people were around. Even if they were to storm the exchange and kill everyone in sight, by the time they had spread their charges around the building, the alarm would have been raised and their escape route would be blocked.  
Colin decided that they would just have to bide their time. They would sit it out for a few hours until the FRELIMO patrols and the pedestrian traffic died down. Then, ifit wasn’t too late, they could carry out their task and still get away before daylight  
Then, another crisis. Their arrival in the shadows had not gone unnoticed. For as they debated what to do, a night watchman stood in the grounds of the construction site and wondered why a heavily armed bunch of men should be sitting in such a gloomy spot for no apparent reason. Eventually, his curiosity got the better of him, and Pete Cole suddenly saw a movement as the man sauntered off towards the FRELIMO guards on duty outside the telephone exchange.  
Expecting trouble, they prepared themselves for a fight. But nothing happened and they lessened their grips on their rifles.  
But within twenty minutes, Colin had been forced to change his plans again. A group of FRELIMO, armed with at least one machinegun suddenly stepped into the little alley and began walking straight towards them.  
It was clear that the night watchman had finally convinced them that something was not quite right It was equally clear that the MNR/SAS’s little game was up; that they had been compromised and they would not be attacking the telephone exchange and prison that night.  
But there was no time for regrets - or finesse.  
There were walls on three sides of them and FRELIMO was advancing down the fourth side. They were trapped and would have to fight their way out.  
Colin quickly gave a whispered command to his callsign to get ready to pull out and prepare to cover both himself and Mike Rich.  
Colin and Mike stepped from the shadows and approached the FRELIMO patrol their silenced 22 rifles hanging loosely in their blackened hands, the deadpan look on their faces telling the lie that they were friendly forces.  
Their bravado and acting abilities did them great credit that night, for by the time the FRELIMO group finally got close to them, they appeared totally offguard. But the mission could not go ahead and the two SAS men knew what must be done if they were to get away unscathed.  
As the FRELIMO patrol commander and his second-in-command got to within a few paces of them, Colin and Mike swiftly lifted up their rifles. There was an immediate sss sss, sss sound as each offloaded an entire magazine of silenced 22 ammunition into them, and the lifeless bodies of the two FRELIMO men crumpled to earth with a thud.  
Thereafter things happened fast. For it was time for the SAS and MNR to get going.  
As they hurried away, the four FRELIMO survivors darted for cover around the back of the buildings and began firing at the fleeing attackers with machineguns and AKs. But generally, their firing following the typical FRELIMO pattern and was aimed not so much at their assailants, as above their heads.  
Nevertheless, Colin and party were quick to dodge away and with Pete Cole and Nick Wilson bringing up the rear and covering them, they nimbly scaled the wall.  
As one giant of an operator leapt over the walL his landing was cushioned by a somewhat startled pedestrian who had the misfortune and incredible bad timing to walk by just as the hulk set sail through the air.  
Then they all thundered away, running through a muddy swampline and back on to the main street in the same direction they had come. Pete Cole had to stop on a traffic island to let a bus screech by, but otherwise they were still in a reasonable semblance of order.  
With the commander setting the pace, they dashed across streets and darted around civilians, shooting at various FRELIMO people on the way.  
Despite all the commotion, the town seemed to be carrying on much the same as before. None of the civilians made any attempt to dive for cover, the customers in the pavement cafes continued sipping their coffees, and no one seemed startled as eight heavily armed men clattered by.  
As they ran up one road, another restaurant came in sight. For Nick Wilson, carrying a pile of MNR pamphlets, it was a golden opportunity.  
The look of sheer horror on the faces of the Portuguese restaurant manager and his customers can only be imagined as a man suddenly appeared in the open doorway, said a brisk “Here” in English, then threw in a bundle of MNR pamphlets. Then, leaving them to read all about the exploits of the rebels, the SAS men raced away.  
Then it was back to the muddy mangrove swamps to rendezvous with the others. In view of the compromise, the operators waiting in the docks for the command to destroy ZANLA’s warehouse were told to abort their task, so once again, ZANLA’s luck held and they got to keep their precious stores.  
They successfully exfiltrated without any further encounters with FRELIMO, but they were all bitterly disappointed.  
At the subsequent debrief, the commander stated that he was quite convinced there had been a security leak But nothing so sinister had happened this time. The MNR had been conducting an extensive and successful suitcase bombing campaign in the urban areas at that time and it had so worried FRELIMO they had tightened security and increased the guard at all key installations.  
For the SAS and MNR it had been bad luck Yet FRELIMO did not get everything their own way that night. The other phases of the mission went ahead as planned and the dredgers and drydocks were successfully blasted with limpet mines, putting them out of commission for many months.  
The assault team responsible for putting the charges and limpets under the dredgers had a narrow escape when a 42 kilogram charge prematurely detonated while they were a few minutes away, creating severe underwater shock Although stunned and exhausted, they persevered and laid six limpet mines on the two dredgers in strong underwater currents.  
The next morning, the crew of the dredger, the _Pungoe_, were on deck watching in wide-eyed amazement as the _Matola_ sank, when, to their horror two more limpets rocked Beira - and the next they knew they were up to their knees in water as their own ship started to sink under them. As punishment for their lack of vigilance, they were made to help salvage the _Matola_.  
The Cubans unsuccessfully tried to salvage the uninsured _Matola_ and in the end a South African marine salvage team had to be called in to repair the Dutch-built dredger and to remove 800 tons of silt, but it was a good six months before FRELIMO got the use of her again.  
FRELIMO didn’t have enough money to salvage the _Pungoe_ and at the time of writing, the wreck of the dredger still lies buried in mud at the bottom of the harbour, where it continues to be a hazard to shipping,  
But for an unexpected breeze which sprang up at the change of tide, the dredgers would have swung into the main channel, blocking shipping and closing the port. As it was, they swung away from the main channel, and the port was only partially closed.  
A third dredger which had not been in the harbour that night was brought in to continue the dredging programme, but FRELIMO were so worried that she would meet the same fate as the other two, they posted armed guards and never tied her up in the same place twice.  
But with the loss of the _Matola_ and the _Pungoe_, the port began to silt up very rapidly and one vessel touched the bottom of the harbour. The marine insurers then viewed Beira as a risky port, and a surcharge was imposed on cargoes, which had a ripple effect on both Mozambique and neighbouring Malawi.  
It had not been an entirely wasted trip after all...  
