It was a somewhat apprehensive Lieutenant Rich Stannard who drove through the gate of the SAS barracks one Monday morning.
The last time he had been there he had been an SAS corporal; since then he had been overseas, done a spell in the Selous Scouts, and completed an officer’s course at the School of Infantry in Gwelo.
Now, he was returning to his parent unit as an officer and he knew those first days were going to be nerve-racking.
He had done fairly well during his time as a corporal, but being an SAS officer was going to be a different experience entirely. It was not enough to have done well at the School of Infantry… he was going to have to prove himself to his fellow officers. The “other ranks” would be watching his performance too.
Rich didn’t have too long to wait to lead a team into action.
He was sent to Mabalouta where Captain Bob McKenna called the new subby to the ops room and tasked him to take a team into south-east Mozambique to ambush ZANLA/FRELIMO vehicles travelling up to Malvernia. They were to hide up midway between two railway sidings south of the Malvernia forward staging post.
A few days later, Rich and the 19 men who now fell under his command were floating down under their canopies. When they got their bearings, they found they had been dropped in completely the wrong place and it would take a good two nights’ walk to get to their ambush site.
There was no time to lose so they set off immediately, and as always in the southeast, the conditions and the terrain were against them. On the morning of the third day, it was an extremely tired and parched bunch of men who pushed their way through the last bit of bush. Their long trek had brought them out to the north of the railway siding that was to be their target area.
They were now desperately short of water. They had been unable to find any on their long march, and what little remained in their water bottles was very precious indeed. They knew that they would have a real problem if they didn’t find water soon.
Rich Stannard, his 2IC, Sergeant Billy Gardner, and the main body of men were to form the killer/ambush group, with Sergeant Dale O’Mulligan and his partner in one early-warning group ... and Sergeant Willum Butler and his partner in the other.
The early-warnings took up their positions either side of the main ambush group, and Sergeant O’Mulligan had no sooner dropped his pack and settled down to await ZANLA vehicles than his partner whispered that there were civilians approaching.
As he looked up, he could see a group of kitted-up ZANLA men sauntering into sight along the rail line. He quickly passed the news to the mission commander, then counted forty terrorists strung out along the rail track. The SAS callsign, caught completely unawares by the _walking_ ZANLA men, watched in the bushes in amazement and let them walk by.
The new SAS lieutenant knew he had blown it. Rich Stannard cursed himself but knew it would be no use explaining he simply had not been expecting ZANLA pedestrians. He knew his mistake would neither be forgiven nor forgotten. How could he have let such an opportunity pass?
“After this Stannard,” his men ribbed, “you’ll be off to the Guard Force.” Forcing such negative thoughts to the back of his mind, the commander began to concentrate on other more pressing matters.
The lack of water was still very much on everyone’s mind and as they lay in wait for vehicles that day, Rich began to plot how they could take over the buildings at the railway siding kill the occupants and capture their water. After that, they could take up their places in the hushes again and continue their task.
In the grey dim light of the following morning, Rich sent out the early-warnings to take up their positions again.
At 05h30, Sergeant Dale O’Mulligan and his partner heard the sounds of talking again - then saw yet another group of ZANLA walking along the rail line.
Snatching up his radio handset, he gave the alert once more. But Rich’s radio was giving him trouble and Dale’s voice was barely scratching through its important message. Dale tried again and this time, the message got through loud and clear and the commander knew what he had to do.
Rich really couldn’t believe what was happening. They were supposed to be waiting for vehicles, yet all they were encountering were ZANLA pedestrians. Well Rich thought, there was no way he was going to let such an opportunity pass a second time. Walking or riding, ZANLA were ZANLA after all.
When he thought about it, they were in the most fantastic killing ground he had ever seen. The enemy would be silhouetted in the early-morning light as they strolled along the embankment and the SAS would have no difficulty picking them off.
Rich told Dale to carry on counting the ZANLA men and let them go past, and told his 2IC by his side to wait for his signal to initiate the ambush.
Rich reasoned that if this lot were strung out like the first group of enemy, the SAS could get them all nicely trapped between the two early-warning groups.
Soon, eighty ZANLA had strolled past the early-warning position and the SAS had grown tired of counting. An unbelievable number of ZANLA were already in the killing ground and it was time for action.
On the signal, the 2IC opened up and four ZANLA men went down in the initial volley. Even before they hit the ground, the rest of the killer group were up and getting stuck in.
“GRENADES!” 2IC Sergeant Gardner yelled above the roar of rifle fire - and grenades it was.
One group of enemy crumpled and fell in a heap in the killing ground. Others, many of them injured, tried unsuccessfully to crawl away to avoid being burnt by the exploding phosphorus grenades.
Some of the enemy managed to return fire and as they did so, SAS Corporal Mo Taylor fell mortally wounded.
Other ZANLA ran straight into the path of Dale O’Mulligan, a trained sniper. The kill rate was soaring.
By the time Rich had called the ceasefire, 17 terrorists lay dead. The others had escaped but intercepts would reveal that another 28 died in the bush.
Then, even before the dust of battle had settled, the main ambush group sprinted forward into the killing ground, ripped the water bottles from the mound of dead terrorists and drank their fill.
As they wiped the water from their blackened faces, and stood over the pile of bodies, some still glowing from phosphorus grenades, two characters, totally unaware of the events at the railway siding that morning, came sauntering along the road towards them without a care in the world.
Kitted out in spotlessly-laundered FRELIMO uniforms, one man was tall and lanky, the other was short and fat with an RPG-7 rocket launcher casually slung over his arm.
“Look!” Rich muttered to his companions as the two men strolled along, “Mutt and Geoff!” Then he asked: “Don’t you think we should move off?”
“’No, No.” his 2IC replied, “just act naturally and let them carry on.” The SAS commander and his 2IC, still surrounded by the heap of bodies, beckoned the two strangers over with a friendly wave. The tall thin recruit and his short, fat friend kept walking towards them.
Then their pace slowed as it eventually dawned on them that there was something not quite right about the mound of mangled bodies ahead of them. Slowly, the short, fat one unslung his RPG-7 and put a rocket in.
As he did so, the SAS sergeant laying low in the grass in an early-warning position, offloaded some rounds in their direction. He missed; but his rounds hit their rocket, it went off - and the two men dropped.
“And that,” said Rich, matter-of-factly to his companions “is the end of Mutt and Geoff.”
The SAS collected the enemy’s ammunition, weapons and mortar bombs and a bonfire was soon raging. Their unexpected opportunity target had turned out to be one of the highest killrates from a single SAS ambush. The 45 enemy they had accounted for that morning would never cross the border to terrorise Rhodesians.
But the loss of Corporal Mo Taylor took the edge off their victory. The mission 2IC was particularly upset. Mo had shared half his last water bottle with him, and that was something a man simply did not do in conditions where every drop of precious water was needed for a soldiers own survival.
The success of the Malvernia ambush had involved the most incredible luck. Had they not been dropped too far out and spent time travelling to the ambush site, they might well have withdrawn before the enemy came along.
Rich was thankful that he had Sergeant Billy Gardner, a very experienced soldier by his side to suggest throwing in grenades at the precise moment the circumstances called for them. From now on, the two men ran a very diplomatic callsign and would sit down and thrash out tactics. It was a partnership that was to work well to the detriment of the enemy.
For Rich, the ambush had been an even better start to his officer’s career in the SAS than he could have hoped for.
After that, he didn’t have to worry about being accepted by his fellow officers, men who had all had their fair share of big successes. The new boy would not be hived off to the Guard Force after all. For having proved himself, he was welcomed into the officers mess as an equal.
