During the election, one of the observers approached a top British official and asked how his government had ever managed to get all the mutually antagonistic factions together during the initial negotiations and keep them on track.  
“Frankly., it has been an enormous con job,” the man replied.  
American politician Dr Richard T. McCormack, who visited Rhodesia during the elections reveals this in his analysis on the Rhodesian debacle published in the States. Dr McCormack, later Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs, added that the title of his work should really have been “The Great Con Job”.  
McCormack - CIO view his report as extremely accurate - says that to understand what the British official meant, it was necessary to step back in time to the immediate period after the April 1979 election. At that time, Nigeria threatened to cut off the billions of dollars in British goods and services bought every year if Mrs Thatcher and her government carried out campaign pledges to drop sanctions and recognise Rhodesia.  
For an economy the size and condition of Great Britain’s, such retaliation along with threats that the Commonwealth itself might break up over the issue, provided the critical arguments for liberal members of the British foreign service to undermine the new Muzorewa government. They were assisted by equally liberal members of the Carter Administration who felt, on principle, that Muzorewa and his alliance with the whites should not be permitted to continue.  
And in the background, the Soviet Ambassador to Zambia, Vassily Solodovnikov, stepped up arms deliveries in the weeks after the April election to reinforce the arguments of the Western liberals that any attempt to consolidate the Muzorewa position would be countered by an intensified war.  
The decision was thus eventually reached in Britain to opt for new elections. The problem then became how to persuade Muzorewa and the whites to step down and permit those elections to take place under British auspices.  
The critical task, says Dr McCormack, “’was to convince each involved party that he stood to gain by new elections and a new constitution.”  
Thus, Muzorewa was told by the highest officials in Great Britain that the British objective was to give him more power- to free him from excessive white influenceand enable him to be the dominant factor in his nation.  
For this reason, he trusted the British and threw away his bird in the hand, with the hope of obtaining two in the bush at the Lancaster House conference.  
General Walls, Commander of Combined Operations, was assured that Great Britain would never permit the Marxist Mugabe to come to power in Rhodesia - that the British were just as repelled by Mugabe’s philosophy and .ruthless operating methods as were the white Rhodesians.  
“’To reinforce the feeling that Great Britain had forgiven the white Rhodesians for their rebellion, great efforts were made to bring General Walls closer to the British socially and personally during the weeks of the conference.”  
(General Walls points out however, that he rejected every invitation placed his way.  
The only person he was willing to meet - and the suggestion came from him, not the British - was the Queen Mother, Colonel-ln-Chief of various elements of the Rhodesian security forces.)  
Gradually, top white Rhodesian leaders were persuaded that new elections were necessary and their essential interests would be safeguarded.  
It was clear the Rhodesians were slowly but steadily running out of money and manpower. By June, 1979, top Rhodesian Treasury officials believed the war might not be sustainable for more than a year without risking a fatal collapse of morale and the economy.  
The white population figure had already dropped by almost a third from its peak of a quarter of a million and many of those emigrating were valuable specialists and technicians.  
The terrorists morale, too, was not high. Bishop Muzorewa’s election and the immediate strongly positive response by large segments of American and European opinion had discouraged them. That, and their high casualty rate, brought matters to a very tense state in high guerrilla councils. They, too, had some reasons to seek another less painful route to power.  
Finally, the British got everyone around the conference table. Dr McCormack says the actual process of negotiation at Lancaster House was assisted by superb work on the part of the British intelligence agencies, who were reported to have bugged almost every conversation held by many of the principals through the conference. If this is true, the British government was aware exactly how far each side could be pushed at any given moment  
(Such tactics were, of course, denied but that was only to be expected, writes the author. The British were on their home territory and who was to stop them? It is understood too that they had cameras hidden in electric light fittings above the Rhodesians” telex machine. Rhodesian CIO men acknowledge that the British intelligence service’s handling of the Rhodesian issue was thoroughly professionaL They inserted their M16 man into Maputo in 1977 and he was on first name terms with both Mugabe and Machel. The man was to tell CIO that ZANLA’s intelligence was good. What he really meant was that the British intelligence was good. It probably explained why Rhodesian security force attempts to eliminate Mugabe failed.)  
Dr McCormack says that top white Rhodesian leaders were told that a British objective was a coalition government headed by Nkomo but containing both the whites and Muzorewa. The whites were assured that as Nkomo headed the minority Matabele tribe, he would never be able to govern without the help and co-operation of both the whites and Muzorewa’s Shona followers.  
Under this plan, Mugabe was to be the odd man out. If he was to be offered anything, it would be a subordinate role in the new cabinet In the event of his refusing and returning to the fighting, it was strongly hinted that Nkomo and the Rhodesian security forces would be given a free hand to deal roughly with Mugabe’s forces.  
Nkomo went along with the plan and as a demonstration of good faith brought part of his army into the assembly points. He did, however, keep some 10 000 of his best forces in Zambia as insurance.  
The British assured Mugabe they would protect him and his forces from any Rhodesian security force retaliation. But Mugabe did not trust the British and it was necessary to bring great diplomatic pressures on Machel to force Mugabe to cooperate.  
As for the South Africans, the British assured them they would never tolerate Mugabe coming to power in Rhodesia. The elections were necessary to isolate Mugabe in the eyes of Africa, and give the confrontation states a graceful way of withdrawing their support of Mugabe.  
The word was quietly passed around about the Nkomo strategy and it was bought by all parties except Muzorewa, says Dr McCormack. Muzorewa was to be given either the powerless figurehead Presidency or the Vice Prime Ministership.  
As everybody involved knew that Mugabe would do dangerously well in the elections if he were to intimidate the voters in the TrLs, the British assured the whites, Muzorewa and the South Africans that they would strictly police the elections and disqualify Mugabe if he attempted to intimidate voters.  
These pledges were accepted at face value and each party went into the elections believing his main objective would be achieved...  
Nkomo felt he was the concensus choice for Prime Minister. Muzorewa believed that Mrs Thatcher wanted to increase his power. The whites believed that the British would ensure their safety in the new Nkomo coalition - and that, as a result, the war would end.  
And Mugabe calculated that his terrorist network and his strong tribal base might bring him close to power.  
Ironically, says Dr McCormack. he was the most reluctant participant of all and felt that the British, Rhodesians, South Africans, Nkomoites and Muzorewa people might gang up on him. But pressure from Mozambique, coupled with his faith in his terrorist network, finally brought him along  
Why did the British choose Nkomo to be their candidate for the prime ministership? While it was true he had received almost one billion US dollars worth of Soviet arms (to be repaid after he came to power) he had also taken money from a host of non-communist sources in the course of his long revolutionary career.  
It was felt he was not a Marxist at heart. Many compared him to Kenyatta in outlook and potential as a unifying leader.  
The problem facing the British though was, how could Muzorewa, who was expected to get the most votes, be persuaded to play second fiddle to Nkomo, who was rightly projected to get only about twenty seats?  
Dr McCormack states: “To get Muzorewa to accept second position to Nkomo, it would be necessary to apply pressure. It would, of course, be considerably easier if Muzorewa were to do less well than expected in the actual voting If Mugabe were to pick up a good piece of the Shona vote and leave up to 25 seats or so, it would make it much easier to persuade Muzorewa to accept the secondary position.’” Dr McCormack says the British did nothing to stop the rampant intimidation by the various parties. Mugabe maimed and terrorised his competition out of the vast Shona tribal trust areas to give his own campaign a free hand. Nkomo kept Mugabe’s and Muzorewa’s people out of his Matabele areas and only in the urban areas was there a semblance of free and fair campaigning on the part of all groups.  
“There were a number of reasons why the British did nothing to stop the intimidation by Mugabe. It would have required firmness and muscle beyond that at their disposal. Or it would have required them to disqualify whole sections of Rhodesia from the election process.”  
This would have incurred the anger of rich Nigeria and other black Commonwealth members, which might have applied economic reprisals on Britain.  
Dr McCormack writes that it served British purposes to let Mugabe do reasonably well. It would be much harder to bring Muzorewa into a coalition as number two if he did too well in the elections. It ensured that Muzorewa would not get a runaway victory.  
The ultimate results shocked and confounded everybody including the British and Rhodesian intelligence services. Nobody expected Mugabe to do as well as he did, or Muzorewa as poorly as he did. Why, asks Dr McCormack, did it happen? The intimidation factor was pervasive and overpowering in the rural areas where most voters lived, he explained. (It was also rife in the urban areas, including the capital.)  
Many young educated black Rhodesians from urban areas resented the power position of the whites and were impatient with Muzorewa’s gradualist approach.  
They identified with the men with the guns, muscle and radicalism.  
Muzorewa was not in power long enough to keep election promises to end the war and improve the lives of the people. He may have relied too heavily on his own narrow sub-tribal base when choosing people for jobs in his government.  
Many Shonas became convinced by Mugabe’s argument that since he had started up the war, only he could end the fighting and bring peace.  
“The British Governor, Lord Soames, appeared to be a fairly weak person and generally allowed his own instincts about intimidation to be overruled by stronger and more disciplined Foreign Office advisers who were felt to be more tolerant of Mugabe’s penchant for intimidation and violence,” Dr McCormack says.  
In the end, however, the British Foreign Office may have outsmarted itself. By permitting the intimidation to complete the process of Muzorewa’s destruction, they lost control of events and the ability to pressure moderation by balancing one faction against the other in a broad based coalition govemment. They also paved the road to absolute power along which Mugabe and his brand of Marxism are now slowly but surely riding.  
“For Rhodesia, it was a sad and fatal miscalculation.”  
Dr McCormack said that although limited sections of the electorate voted in conditions approaching free and fair elections, there were vast stretches of the country populated by millions where the campaigning process was a caricature of democratic procedures as people understand them in the west.  
The real problem, he said, was that due to intimidation, millions of people lived in regions where it proved impossible for a legitimate campaign to be conducted by more than a single party. At Fort Victoria, for instance, where more than one million people lived, the British election administrator openly admitted that no party other than that represented by Mr Mugabe was permitted to campaign.  
Nkomo’s and Muzorewa’s election workers had met violent deaths when they attempted to organise a campaign in the non-urban areas, and eventually all parties other than Mr Mugabe’s were forced to withdraw from the entire area.  
The pattern was much the same in other tribal areas, particularly along the Mozambique border. It was, however, only the beginning of intimidation practised on the voters, says Dr McCormack. People were not only forced to vote but were warned that Mugabe’s men had the means to know how they voted. In at least one instance, young girls were taken to the polling booths and their parents told the girls would be taken to Mozambique to help with the war, if Mugabe lost the election.  
One of Nkomo’s parliamentary candidates was killed by a Mugabe supporter by having hot coals poured down his throat, stated Dr McCormack.  
“For an American to grasp fully what has happened in large parts of Rhodesia during this election campaign, one may think of an election held forty years ago in an ethnic neighbourhood largely dominated by the Mafia.  
“Although a cop may be stationed near the polls on election day to keep the lines of voters orderly, his presence is simply incapable of mitigating the impact of the pervasive sinister forces which have been at work in the neighbourhood for months prior to the election.  
“Nobody but the Mafia candidate was permitted to campaign. Nobody was permitted to canvass, or make speeches, or distribute literature, or organize the workers...  
except the Mafia candidate. Any infractions were sternly dealt with.  
“And on election day, the Mafia representatives made the rounds and said: ‘All of you will go to the polls today and vote for our man. In case you get any strange ideas about voting for anyone else, you should know that we have paid off one of the election officials to stand behind the voting machine and let us know how each of you vote. Now, our man is going to win. But in case he doesn’t, we intend to trash (kill) the whole damn neighbourhood.’  
“The picture I have presented here is obviously overdrawn - but not by much. Godfather Mugabe has made an offer to the Shona people of many primitive areas of the country they simply cannot refuse.”  
Dr McCormack said none of the parties was totally above reproach, and this included undisciplined elements of the security forces who were involved in scattered incidents of attempted intimidation.  
“But it is absolutely clear from available statistics that Mr Mugabe’s intimidatory tactics dwarfed those of other candidates in terms of scale, sheer brutality and effectiveness.”  
Take Mugabe’s main campaign argument- he had brought them the war and only he could end it. Otherwise it was back to the bush and the killing,.  
When Mugabe’s escort officer in one assembly point was asked what would happen if Mugabe lost the election, he responded that every voter in the region knew what would happen. Asked to be more specific, he merely repeated himself, that every voter knew what would happen. “Of course, he meant that Mugabe would start up the war again, together with its killing and disruption,” Dr McCormack said.  
There were more subtle forms of intimidation too- such as Mugabe men pretending to take notes of people going in and out of the polling areas, crowing in the distance (Mugabe’s election symbol was the rooster) and making it very clear that Godfather Mugabe’s presence was all pervasive and all watching.  
“Some individuals expressed the pious hope that the people would react against all this terror by voting against Mr Mugabe at the polls. By the time the voters arrived at the polls, they were thoroughly cowed... “’  
Intimidation undoubtedly played a significant part in the large voter turnout (94 percent), states Dr McCormack.  
“It was obvious that the ordinary citizens of the war-weary land were desperately tired of death and disruption involved in the conflict. Many people would undoubtedly have voted for Atilla the Hun if he offered the prospect of an end to the conflict, regardless ofthe long term impact of such a victory. These people were not thinking in long term contexts. They were worried about physical survival through the next weeks and months.’”  
Dr McCormack says the British Foreign Office carefully chose their own parliamentary delegates and officials from those who would certify the election as fair and free. British personnel privately stated before polling began that the elections would be declared free and fair and that would be that. It seemed very likely too that some of the members of the Commonwealth delegations were also hand-picked to include people who would co-operate, although there were exceptions.  
One German observer declared: “If this election is fair and free, then I am a Chinaman.” One New Zealand observer stated privately: “This process offends every democratic bone in my body.” Delegates from Freedom House (a conservative nongovernmental think tank) were also deeply distressed at the intimidation.  
“But these were isolated voices, muffled by the vast chorus of those orchestrated to sing another tune. From a detached point of view, it was, in fact, a superbly managed operation,” writes Dr McCormack.  
One British official complained that criticism by some observers “wasn’t constructive in the least.” But Dr McCormack says that some of the older retired British officials who had been called back into service to assist with the election process were clearly uncomfortable over what was happening,.  
“They knew that it was an exercise in real politik; that important British interests were involved: that British prestige and interests required that this election process be judged legitimate and a ‘success” and they went along with it.  
“’But the day the results were announced, the old colonials knew that the thing had misfired. That Mugabe had outfoxed them. That their chosen instrument, Nkomo, had been defeated and that their whole plan lay in shambles.’”  
The task then became to put the best face on the situation and try to make the best of things.  
After Robert Mugabe’s crushing victory was announced to a stunned audience of foreign observers and visiting journalists, one British official left the briefing room, turned to a senior Rhodesian official and said: “’Well at least now you have got us Brits off your back” The stunned Rhodesian was barely able to contain a physical response to such fatuity.  
Summing up, Dr McCormack says that his analysis was not intended for the purpose of pointing a hostile finger at British Rhodesian policy and operations. All nations act on their interests and British diplomats can hardly be faulted for placing British interests over those of moderate Rhodesians.  
“And, let there be no mistake, very important British interests were at stake in Rhodesia... And, in fairness, it must be said that British diplomacy intended to bring out of the Rhodesian tangle a solution that would end the war and establish a stable coalition government, whose various factions would balance off against each other to prevent a one-party dictatorship. Unfortunately, a tragic miscalculation was made.”  
 • • •  
The most violent and savage election campaign in recent world history was over.  
Within days, the bulk of the 700 visiting journalists had left and Rhodesia had disappeared from the front pages of the world.., and by the end of the year, many whites, including members of the security forces, had left the country.  
Would it be the last election, asked Dr McCormack? Would it follow the familiar African pattern of one man, one vote, one time?  
• • •  
For seven long years, Rhodesians had waged what is recognised as the most tactically-brilliant and determined counter-insurgency campaign of modern times.  
It had been fought against almost insuperable odds and with a record that was unsurpassed in both skill and bravery, according to military historian Michael Evans.  
_[1]And yet it could only ever be a holding action until such time as a political solution could be found to end the conflict.  
While the insurgents were not winning and while the Rhodesians were prepared to strike offensively at enemy concentrations “to hell and back if necessary”, the Rhodesian military always conceded that a military victory was an impossibility.  
That the odds were certainly stacked against the Rhodesians there can be no doubt _They were in an impossible strategic position with an operational area of 3 200 kilometres (2 000 miles) rugged, exposed border terrain. They were diplomatically isolated; had economic sanctions to contend with; often had to make do with obsolescent equipment; did not possess conventional military hardware; had severe manpower restrictions as opposed to the enemy who had unlimited reserves .... and they faced increasing white emigration (12 000 in 1978).  
_[2]Rhodesians responded to the intense political, military, psychological, economic and international pressure with great resilience and as one military analyst_ commented: “If in the end the fight against Chimurenga was losL it was not for want of effort, skill and idealism but because the costs became too great and the odds too overwhelming.”  
The price ofpeace had indeed been high and grevious. _White Rhodesian casualties have been calculated as being proportionately ten times more that those suffered by the Americans in Viet Nam and half of Britain’s losses during the Second World War.  
The red soil of Africa had been stained a deeper hue with the blood of more than 27 500 black and white Rhodesian lives (insurgents, servicemen and civilians). Some 275000 had been wounded and injured with l,Sm refugees, homeless and displaced people.  
For thousands of others too - the orphaned, widowed and bereaved on both sides the mark of war would never be erased.  
At the time of writing, the Rhodesian-Zimbabwean bush-war is assessed as being _the most bitter struggle ever fought in sub-Saharan Africa. Those involved in it would hope it was the last, but without a much-needed crystal ball, particularly essential in a turbulant Africa, no one is making any guarantees.  
Certainly when the first shots in the Chimurenga war were fired, no one could have predicted the scale and intensity of the coming conflicL or guessed how long the fight would last.  
No one in his wildest dreams could have foretold that the Portuguese, who had effected some measure of control over anti-Rhodesian terrorists, would lose control of neighbouring Mozambique or that the entire eastern and south-eastern flanks would become totally vulnerable, enabling insurgents to pour across in their thousands.  
Rhodesian Special Branch had, through their excellent network of ground agents, kept abreast of terrorism in the early days of the war. But once the conflict was taken into the population, it was an entirely different matter. It became obvious that the tide of events that began at the end of 1972 could only be solved by political means.  
That it took the two nationalisms and two races so long to find a political accommodation was tragic.  
Every political opportunity missed was in fact one more option lost to the Rhodesians, who never controlled the rate, the intensity and scale of the war.  
“The illusion that having educated the peasantry in many cases to University standard and induced them to enter the Western capitalist system they could be denied political power or a share of it was indeed facile thinking,” one intelligence source commented.  
According to the same source, the blame for the war rested with “the whole fabric of Rhodesian society brought up to believe by continued and slanted propaganda that Rhodesia was different No heed was paid to the lessons of Indo-China, Viet Nam, Algeria, Malaya, Angola and Mozambique.  
“We almost had the same attitude as the Americans when they went into Viet Nam.  
It was as if to them there had been no previous colonial war in Indo-China and if there had been, then it was the French Army who lost And the Americans attitude was that they were not colonials, their cause was to bolster up a weak and corrupt government against communism.  
“The idea of black terrorists standing up to the highly trained Rhodesian Army was in any case preposterous. It appeared that no one had heard of Mao’s concept of the fish swimming in an ocean of people, of the terrorists strangling the life of the country by dominating the rural areas, of an army winning battle after battle but losing the people and thus the war.”  
The principals involved in the decision-making, only listened and reacted to what they wanted to hear and in essence were as events showed, not prepared to change believing that they had numerous options open to them and controlled the situation, but their attitude was ‘Canute’-like in its miscalculation, the source added.  
The Rhodesian intelligence organisation ultimately fed information into the system, which was sometimes read and digested and filtered out, but was often countered by the “’Administration”, who had served the needs of the blacks for years but who failed to perceive the change in their political aspirations.  
“’The military would find that fighting guerillas on the floor of the Zambezi Valley was a different proposition from combating them when they merged in a sea of people and thus they were fighting the tip of the iceberg, that part of the problem that was visible.  
“By banning all black political leaders and the organisations that they represented and not replacing them with an alternative in the form of political advancement in step with other black aspirations in the educational social political and public service fields, the only other outlet left open to blacks was violence.” (From 1976, there was a gradual slowing down in the economy and black youths who would normally have been absorbed into the economy turned to terrorism as a source of income. This factor was to give terrorism a tremendous boost.)  
Even after the Portuguese collapse, there was according to the same intelligence source, a mindless optimism that prevailed in all sections of government that “’something would turn up”.  
The Victoria Falls bridge conference and the release of Nkomo, Sithole and Mugabe - following pressure from South Africa - was designed to break that impasse.  
The events which took place at the conference showed that another option had been cast aside, and the war expanded in magnitude drawing into the whirlpool more and more manpower and finance.  
Introducing the traditional and accepted leaders of black political thought and aspirations back into the terrorist fold at a time when FRELIMO was taking over in Mozambique, merely led to an escalation in the war.  
Then in 1976 came the Kissinger diplomatic shuttle, and lan Smith, again under pressure from South Africa. conceded majority rule. The subsequent Geneva Conference came to nothing, but for white Rhodesia, there could be no going back from that stand. “Many times I sat down and thought of the treachery and betrayal by our friends and not our enemies,” Smith commented much later.  
By 1978 the need to bring about a political settlement after the unsuccessful Kissinger negotiations became a critical factor. Despite attempts to divide the PF leaders by embracing Nkomo, he elected to continue his alliance with Mugabe.  
The only option left was to gain broad black support with the internal settlement.  
But it was too late. The ZANLA cadres were too deep in the popular sea to be defeated politically.  
When power was eventually handed over to Bishop Muzorewa’s black majority rule government, he had only one option left to him and that was to stop the war. Despite efforts to sell the internal settlement, the country had been subjected to such a degree of negative propaganda that the effect of the internal settlement was a shock to the system.  
Then came the British and the Lancaster House Conference- and the rest is wellrecorded. The ZANLA cadres deep-seated in the population delivered Zimbabwe to Mugabe, not by the bullet but by the ballot, according to historian Michael Evans.  
As one senior Army commander told the author. “If history is to be accurately recorded, the world must be told that a very fine Army which had never been defeated on the battlefield, collapsed in virtual ignominy- albeit kept tightly within the ranks that remained- through defeat in the council chamber.”  
_[3]According to one military commentator, the passing of Rhodesia and the coming of Zimbabwe marked the real end of the British Empire.  
“In one of the quirks of history, it was ironic that Lord Peter Carrington should have presided over the foundation of black power in Zimbabwe in 1979 when his namesake, Major-General Sir Frederick Carrington, had presided over the foundation of white power in Rhodesia in the 1890s. Symbolically, what one Carrington gave, another took away,” said Michael Evans.  
“Thus when in April, 1980, the Chimurenga flag went up and the Union Jack came down, it was, in truth, the last imperial sunset.”  

￼  
[1] Michael Evans  
[2] Michael Evans  
[3] Michael Evans
